Amrita Narlikar is the President of the German Institute for Global and Area Studies (GIGA)  and Professor of International Relations at the Faculty of Economic and Social Sciences at the University of Hamburg, Germany. She is also a non-resident Senior Fellow at the Observer Research Foundation (ORF). She was previously Reader in International Political Economy in the Department of Politics and International Studies (POLIS) at the University of Cambridge, founding Director of the Centre for Rising Powers, and a Fellow of Darwin College, Cambridge. She works in the fields of international negotiations, the political economy of international trade, and rising powers. Narlikar is the daughter of journalist and author Aruna Narlikar and physicist Anant V. Narlikar. She is the granddaughter of physicist Vishnu Vasudev Narlikar.


== Career ==
Amrita Narlikar was awarded her MPhil and DPhil from Oxford University (Balliol College), on an Inlaks Scholarship and was then appointed to a Junior Research Fellowship at St John’s College, Oxford. She also has a Master’s degree from the School of International Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, and a Bachelors degree in History from St. Stephen’s College, Delhi.
Prior to moving to Hamburg, she held the position of Reader in International Political Economy at the University of Cambridge and a Fellowship at Darwin College. She was also Senior Research Associate at the Centre for International Studies at the University of Oxford from 2003 to 2014.


== Publications ==
Amrita Narlikar has authored/edited eleven books. Her most recent book has been published by Cambridge University Press:
Poverty Narratives in International Trade Negotiations and Beyond, New York: CUP, 2020 Her previous books include:
Bargaining with a Rising India: Lessons from the Mahabharata (co-authored), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014 The Oxford Handbook on the World Trade Organization (co-edited), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012 Deadlocks in Multilateral Negotiations: Causes and Solutions (edited), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010 She has also published numerous articles in Foreign Affairs, International Affairs, Global Policy, etc.


== Policy Advice ==
The policy relevance of her research brings Amrita into frequent and close exchange with practitioners.  She has authored several policy briefs — e.g. for Munich Security Times, Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung, CIGI, Commonwealth Secretariat etc., and has had her expertise cited in a range of media outlets — e.g. Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Der Tagesspiegel, Die Welt, Spiegel Online, Deutsche Welle, NDR, BBC, etc.


== References ==


== External links ==
Amrita Narlikar's Website at GIGA Hamburg
POLIS faculty page
Global Policy Journal