Ankur Pare is an Indian sociologist, teacher, and environmentalist. He is a recipient of the Indira Gandhi National Service Scheme Award awarded by the Government of India and the Madhya Pradesh State Level National Service Scheme Award by the Government of Madhya Pradesh.


== Early life and education ==
Pare was born on 20  December 1984. He hails from village Dulia, Harda, Madhya Pradesh. His parents are not highly educated. He spent his childhood in an environment where there were not enough resources and education was of no importance. He completed his school education in the village itself. Pare graduated from Barkatullah University Bhopal and did LLB. He did his Master's degree (sociology) and Master of Laws (LLM), UGC NET (sociology), MPhil (sociology), and then received his PhD. Dr. Pare was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow in the Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR), Ministry of Human Resource and Development, Government of India. He completed his doctorate under the guidance of educationist and sociologist Asha Singh from Barkatullah University Bhopal. He has done Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Applications and also done Post Graduate Diploma in Yoga Science.


== Career ==
Apart from sociologist and social worker, Dr. Pare is also a writer. He has written several articles on social issues and distortions present in society. His book "Sociological Study of Displaced Families" depicts the problems of displaced families, food security, social organization, and cultural systems.Dr. Pare is an international associate member of the sociologist institution American Sociological Association (ASA). In 2021, he became a member of the International Society for the Comparative Study of Civilization (ISCS) and a member of the Fellow grade of the American Association of Higher Education Accreditation (AAHEA).


== Awards and honours ==
2006: Received Indira Gandhi National Service Scheme Award by the Government of India.
2005: Received Madhya Pradesh State Level National Service Award Scheme by the Government of Madhya Pradesh.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website