Anne Cheryl Petersen (born September 11, 1944) is an American psychologist. She is one of the founders of the Association for Psychological Science. In 2000, she was listed as one of the most influential psychologists by the Encyclopedia of Psychology. Her work focuses primarily on adolescent development and gender issues.


== Early life and education ==
Petersen was born in Little Falls, Minnesota on September 11, 1944, to Rhoda Pauline Studley and Franklin Hanks. Her mother, Studley, was a secretary and her father, Hanks, was a coach and a teacher.Petersen studied as an undergraduate at the University of Chicago, receiving a Bachelor of Arts in Mathematics in 1966. She continued her education at the University of Chicago, receiving a Master of Science in Statistics in 1972, and a Doctor of Philosophy in Measurement, Evaluation, and Statistical Analysis in 1973.


== Career and research ==
Petersen has published over 300 research articles concerning areas of psychology, especially adolescent health and development, gender issues, science policy, and global issues. Petersen worked as a professor at Pennsylvania State University from August 1982 to March 1992. On July 1, 1987, she became the first dean of the College of Health and Human Development and Family Studies at Pennsylvania State University. In 1992, Petersen accepted a position as a professor at the Institute of Child Development at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. From May 1992 to March 1995, Petersen worked at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities.Petersen continued her professional career at Stanford University. From August 2006 to June 2009, Petersen was a deputy director and professor at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford . In 2010, she accepted a position as a research professor at the University of Michigan. From January 2010 to the present, Petersen has been at the Center for Human Growth and Development at the University of Michigan.


== Philanthropy ==
Petersen was the Senior Vice President Programs and Corporate Officer of the W. K. Kellogg Foundation for 10 years. The Kellogg Foundation funds programs that benefit children from disadvantaged communities in primarily low income areas. As Senior Vice President, Petersen was responsible for all United States, Latin American, and southern African programs in the organization.Following her work with the Kellogg Foundation, Petersen founded the non-profit, public foundation Global Philanthropy Alliance (GPA), which funds "early stage youth-led entrepreneur organizations in Africa." The Alliance makes small grants to organizations in African countries. An African board and country committees help to fund the GPA. In addition to being one of the founders of the Global Philanthropy Alliance, Petersen is also the president.


== Selected works ==
Witting, M. A., & Petersen, A. C. (1979). Sex-Related Differences in Cognitive Functioning: Developmental Issues. New York: Academic Press.
Brooks-Gunn, J., & Petersen, A. C. (1983). Girls at Puberty: Biological and Psychosocial Perspectives. New York: Plenum Press.
Lerner, R. M., Petersen, A. C., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1991). Encyclopedia of Adolescence. New York: Garland.
Petersen, A. C., & Mortimer, J. T. (2006). Youth Unemployment and Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Millstein, S. G., Petersen, A. C., & Nightingale, E. O. (2007). Promoting the Health of Adolescents: New Directions for the Twenty-first Century. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gibson, K. R., & Petersen, A. C. (2011). Brain Maturation and Cognitive Development: Comparative and Cross-cultural Perspectives. New Brunswick: Transaction.
Petersen, A. C., Joseph, J., & Feit, M. N. (2014). New Directions in Child Abuse and Neglect Research. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Graber, J. A., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Petersen, A. C. (2016). Transitions through Adolescence: Interpersonal Domains and Context. London: Routledge.


== Honors ==
Election to the National Academy of Medicine
Election to the National Academy of Sciences (NASEM)
Chair of NASEM's Policy and Global Affairs Divisional Committee
Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)
Fellow of the International Society for the Study of Behavioural Development (ISSBD)
Fellow of the American Psychological Association (APA)
Founding fellow of the Association for Psychological Science (APS)
Co-founder of the Society for Research on Adolescence
Deputy Director and chief operating officer of the National Science Foundation (NSF)


== References ==