Anthony Saunders is the John M. Schiff Professor of Finance at New York University Stern School of Business and is currently on the Executive Committee of the Salomon Center of the Study of Financial Institutions.  He teaches "Market and Liquidity Risk" in the Risk Management Open Enrollment program for Stern Executive Education.  Saunders also teaches for both the Master of Science in Global Finance (MSGF) and Master of Science in Risk Management Program for Executives (MSRM).  MSGF is jointly offered by NYU Stern and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. MSRM  is offered by NYU Stern, in partnership with the Amsterdam Institute of Finance.Saunders has taught both undergraduate and graduate level courses at NYU since 1978, and his teaching and research have specialized in financial institutions and international banking.  He has also served as a visiting professor all over the world, including at INSEAD, the Stockholm School of Economics, and the University of Melbourne.


== Biography ==
Saunders holds positions on the Board of Academic Consultants of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors as well as on the Council of Research Advisors for the Federal National Mortgage Association.  In addition, he has acted as a visiting scholar at the comptroller of the Currency and at the Federal Monetary Fund.


== Publications ==
Saunders is an editor of the Journal of Banking and Finance and the Journal of Financial Market's, Instruments and Institutions, and is an associate editor of eight other journals, including Financial Management and the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.  He has written two books and over 70 books, and his research has been published in all of the major finance and banking journals and in several books.
Allen, L.; J. Boudoukh & A. Saunders (2004). Understanding Market, Credit, and Operational Risk: The Value at Risk Approach. Wiley-Blackwell.
Saunders, A.; V. Acharya & I. Hasan. Should Banks Be Diversified? Evidence from Individual Bank Loan Portfolios.
Saunders, A. & L. Allen. Incorporating Systemic Influences into Risk Measurements: A Survey of the Literature.
Saunders, A. & L. Allen. A Survey of Cyclical Effects in Credit Risk Measurement Models.
Saunders, A.; L. Allen & G. DeLong. Issues in the Credit Risk Modeling of Retail Markets.
Saunders, A.; L. Allen & J. Jagtiani. The Role of Financial Advisors in Mergers and Acquisitions.
Saunders, A. & E. Altman. An Analysis and Critique of the BIS Proposal on Capital Adequacy and Ratings.
Saunders, A. & E. Altman. Credit Ratings and the BIS Reform Agenda.
Saunders, A. & M. Millon Cornett (2011). Financial Institutions Management: A Risk Management Approach, 7/e. McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Saunders, A.; S. Dahiya & M. Puri. Bank Borrowers and Loan Sales: New Evidence on the Uniqueness of Bank Loans.
Saunders, A.; S. Dahiya & A. Srinivasan. Financial Distress and Bank Lending Relationships. Journal of Finance.
Saunders, A.; K. John & L. Senbet. Theory of Capital Regulation and Bank Management Compensation. Review of Financial Studies.
Saunders, A.; D. Kim & D. Palia. The Long-Run Behavior of Debt and Equity Underwriting Spreads.
Saunders, A.; N. Massoud & B. Scholnick. The Impact of ATM Surcharges on Large Versus Small Banks: Is There a Customer Relationship Effect?.
Saunders, A. & L. Schumacher. The Determinants of Bank Interest Margins: An International Study. Journal of International Money and Finance.
Saunders, A.; A. Srinivasan & I. Walter. Price Formation in the OTC Corporate Bond Markets: A Field Study of the Inter-Dealer Market. Journal of Economics and Business.
Saunders, A. & R. Stover. Commercial Bank Underwriting of Credit-Enhanced Bonds: Are there Certification Benefits to the Issuer?.
Saunders, A. & R. Stover. Commercial Bank Underwriting Paper.


== Education ==
Saunders received his BS, MS, and PhD from the London School of Economics.


== References ==


== External links ==
Stern Executive Education
NYU Stern Profile
Anthony Saunders’ Biography
List of Books on Amazon
Master of Science in Global Finance