Arlie Russell Hochschild (; born January 15, 1940) is an American professor emerita of sociology at the University of California, Berkeley and writer.  Hochschild has long focused on the human emotions which underlie moral beliefs, practices,  and social life generally. She is the author of nine books including,   most recently Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right, a finalist for the National Book Award. In The Second Shift, The Managed Heart,  The Time Bind and many of her other books, she continues  the tradition of C. Wright Mills drawing links between private troubles and public issues.Hochschild seeks to make visible the underlying role of emotion  and the  work of managing emotion, the paid form of which she calls "emotional labor."  For her, "the expression and management of emotion are social processes. What people feel and express depend on societal norms, one's social category and position, and cultural factors."In 2021 she was elected to the American Philosophical Society.


== Biography ==


=== Early life and family background ===
Hochschild was born in Boston, Massachusetts, the daughter of Ruth Alene (Libbey) and Francis Henry Russell, a diplomat who served in Israel, New Zealand, Ghana, and Tunisia. Arlie Hochschild grew up in a household where her mother was the primary caregiver and her father was the provider. Her mother "volunteered for the PTA, and helped start a preschool program in Montgomery County, Maryland, all the while supporting my father's job as a government official and diplomat" (Hochschild, Commercialization, p. 3). Hochschild drew on her childhood experiences to do study and write on caregiving and having a loving relationship with your children. In the preface to her book, The Commercialization of Intimate Life, she says that her mother was a wonderful woman who committed her life to caring for her family and was excellent at it, but she never appeared pleased doing so. She has been married to her husband, writer Adam Hochschild, since June 1965. She became a mother herself and raised two sons named David Russel and Gabriel Russel.  
In Hochschild's early life, she became fascinated with the boundaries people draw between inner experience and outer appearance.
As she writes in the preface to her book The Managed Heart: the Commercialization of Human Feeling, "I found myself passing a dish of peanuts among many guests and looking up at their smiles; diplomatic smiles can look different when seen from below than when seen straight on. Afterwards I would listen to my mother and father interpret various gestures. The tight smile of the Bulgarian emissary, the averted glance of the Chinese consul . . . I learned, conveyed messages not simply from person to person but from Sofia to Washington, from Peking to Paris, and from Paris to Washington. Had I passed the peanuts to a person, I wondered, or to an actor? Where did the person end and the act begin? Just how is a person related to an act?"


=== Education and academic career ===
Hochschild graduated from Swarthmore College in 1962  and then earned her M.A. and Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley, whose faculty she soon joined. She wrote her first book, The Unexpected Community, in 1973. As a graduate student, Hochschild was greatly inspired by the writings of Erving Goffman and C. Wright Mills. In White Collar, Mills argued that we "sell our personality." This resonated with Hochschild, however she felt that more needed to be added. As she writes,

"Mills seemed to assume that in order to sell personality, one need only have it. Yet simply having personality does not make one a diplomat, any more than having muscles makes one an athlete. What was missing was a sense of the active emotional labor involved in the selling. This labor, it seemed to me, might be one part of a distinctly patterned yet invisible emotional system—a system composed of individual acts of 'emotion work,' social 'feeling rules,' and a great variety of exchanges between people in private and public life."Hochschild went on to create concepts which illuminate the power of emotion in social life. 


== Hochschild's sociological theories ==


=== Emotion as social ===
Hochschild starts with the thesis that human emotions—joy, sadness, anger, elation, jealousy, envy, despair—are, in large part, social. Each culture, she argues, provides us with prototypes of feeling which, like the different keys on a piano, attune us to different inner notes. Tahitians, she points out, have one word, "sick," for what in other cultures might correspond to envy, depression, grief or sadness.Culture guides the act of recognizing a feeling by proposing what's possible for us to feel. In The Managed Heart Hochschild cites the Czech novelist Milan Kundera, who writes that the Czech word "litost" refers to an indefinable longing, mixed with remorse and grief—a constellation of feelings with no equivalent in any other language. It is not that non-Czechs never feel litost, she notes; it is that they are not, in the same way, invited to lift out and affirm the feeling—instead of to disregard or suppress it.Apart from what we think a feeling is, Hochschild asserts in The Managed Heart, we have ideas about what it should be. We say, "You should be thrilled at winning the prize" or "you must be furious at what he did." We evaluate the fit between feeling and context in light of what she calls "feeling rules," which are themselves deeply rooted in culture. In light of such feeling rules, we try to manage our feelings—i.e., we try to be happy at a party, or grief-stricken at a funeral. In all of these ways—our experience of an interaction, our definition of feeling, our appraisal and management of feeling—feeling is social.
In Hochschild's later work, she introduces the "concept of "framing rules", which provide the context for feeling rules." She explains that framing rules are the "rules governing how we see situations" and how they "point to the cognitive, meaningful, and interpretive frame within which feeling rules are situated." An example that clarifies the relationship between framing rules and feeling rules would be:
"The norm that women should be at home is a framing rule, while the norm to feel happy about being at home, or to feel guilty about being absent, is a feeling rule."Emotional expression and management are learned in the private sphere, then later through participation in public life.


=== Emotional labor ===
"Emotional labor" refers to the management of one's feelings and expressions based on the emotional requirements of a job. For example, in The Managed Heart Hochschild writes of how flight attendants are trained to control passengers' feelings during times of turbulence and dangerous situations while suppressing their own fear or anxiety. Bill collectors, too, are often trained to imagine debtors as lazy or dishonest, and so to feel suspicious and be intimidating. As the number of service jobs grows, so too does the amount and number of kinds of emotional labor. In the era of COVID-19, she argues, many front-line workers do the emotional labor of bracketing heightened  anxieties about their own health and that of their families while dealing with the fear, anxiety and sometimes hostility of the public.Increasingly, Hochschild argues, emotional labor has gone global. In her essay, "Love and Gold," in Global Woman she describes immigrant care workers who leave their children and elderly back in the Philippines, Mexico or elsewhere in the global South, to take paid jobs caring for the young and elderly in families in the affluent North. Such jobs call on workers to manage grief and anguish vis-a-vis their own long-unseen children, spouses, and elderly parents, even as they try to feel—and genuinely do feel—warm attachment to the children and elders they daily care for in the North. In an interview with Journal of Consumer Culture, Hochschild focuses on the emotional labor of female immigrants, "So you have women from the Philippines, Sri Lanka, India, and Mexico leaving their children and elderly behind to take jobs caring for American, Canadian, Saudi, and European children and elderly. It was also not uncommon to hear nannies say, ‘I love the kids I take care of now more than my own. I hate to say it, but I do'". "Extending from the eldest daughter in a rural village who takes care of siblings while a mother cares for an employer's children in the city of a poor country to that employer's employer—and children—in a rich country, outsourcing care work creates a global care chain with a different emotional task at each link of it." Hochschild coined the term global care chain to refer to "a pattern of women leaving their own families in developing countries to care for the children of well-off families." She connects her ideas about emotional labor to Richard Sennett’s concept about “hidden injuries”. Hochschild writes:
"The idea of emotional labor—and of a sociology of emotions in general—helps illuminate the “hidden injuries,” to quote Richard Sennett, of all the systems we study, including the latest versions of sexism, racism, and capitalism”.  


=== Work and family ===
In other books, Hochschild applies her perspective on emotion to the American family. In The Second Shift, she argues that the family has been stuck in a "stalled revolution." Most mothers work for pay outside the home; that is the revolution. But the jobs they go out to and men they come home to haven't changed as rapidly or deeply as she has; that is the stall. So working mothers end up doing the lion's share of the work—both emotional and physical—of tending the home, which leads her to feel resentment. Hochschild traces links between a couple's division of labor and their underlying "economy of gratitude." Who, she asks, is grateful to whom, and for what? Even those who accommodate work and family life face some difficulties, such as a variety of high funded day care options; jobs with little to no fluidity for those who require to care for a sick child; school itinerary that are based on having a stay at home parent; and the assumption that they will work a "second shift," presuming the majority of domestic labor (Hochschild 1989).
In The Time Bind, Hochschild studied working parents at a Fortune 500 company dealing with an important contradiction.  On one hand, nearly everyone she talked to told her that "my family comes first." She argues that working parents in the United States put in long hours at work not because "employers demand long hours nor out of financial need, but because their work lives are more rewarding than their home lives." For this reason, working parents feel a magnetic draw to work. For about a fifth of these working parents, she found, home felt like work and work felt like home. Where, she asked informants, do you get help when you need it? Often the answer was work. Where are you most rewarded for what you do, work or home? Often the answer was work. One man told her, "When I'm doing the right thing with my teenage son, chances are he's giving me hell for it. When I'm doing the right thing at work, my boss is clapping me on my back."   Parents, she found, handled this strain in several ways. One way was to reduce their idea of what they needed. ("Oh, I don't really need time to unwind.")  Another was to outsource personal tasks.  A third was to develop an imaginary self, the self you would be if only you had time. The "time bind" refers to the lack of time parents had to themselves, the feeling that they were always running late and the thought that they were confined to the limited hours of the day. Thus, in the "time bind" Hochschild denotes this paradox of "reversed worlds, in which family becomes like work and work takes on the feel and tone of family."In an interview with Journal of Consumer Culture, Hochschild describes how capitalism plays a role in one's “imaginary self”. She explains, “Many workers put in long hours, and return home exhausted. They turn to television as a form of passive ‘recovery’ from work. In the four hours of television, they're exposed to thousands of amusing, fun advertisements. Those ads function as a conveyor belt to the mall. At the mall, they spend the money they've earned on objects that function as totems to a ‘potential self’ or hypothetical self – a self we would be if only we had time”. It is also a self in danger of being perpetually in emotional debt to loved ones.


=== Politics and emotion ===
Her latest book, Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right, is based on five years of immersion research among Louisiana supporters of the Tea Party. It explores the role of emotion in politics by first posing a paradox.  Why, she asks, do residents of the nation's second poorest state vote for candidates who resist federal help? Why in a highly polluted state, do they vote for politicians reluctant to regulate polluting industries?  Her search for answers leads her to the concept of the "deep story."  A deep story is a story that feels true about a highly salient feature of life. One takes facts  out of a deep story. One takes moral precepts out of the deep story. What remains is simply what feels true about a highly salient issue, and can be described through a metaphor, as the experience of "waiting in line" for a valued reward, and witnessing unwelcome "line-cutters." Everyone, she argues, has a deep story—and for many on the right, it reflects a keen sense of decline, the sting of scorn, and sense of being a stranger in one's own land. In an 2020 OpEd for The Guardian, she proposes the concept of  "emotional strategy"—a strategy of focusing primarily on emotion—which many politicians pursue as a minor part of an overall strategy, and others pursue as a central project. She has added other "chapters" to the deep story that have occurred since 2016, which she relates in an interview Derik Thompson conducted with her in "The Deep Story of Trumpism" for the Atlantic Monthly. She's suggested other ideas on politics through OpEds and  book reviews.
Hochschild's work describes the many ways in which each individual self becomes a shock absorber of larger forces, and focuses on the impact of these forces on emotion.
More initiatives to feminize global migration have concentrated on "global care chains," as Arlie Hochschild refers to them (Hochschild 2000, 2002) These networks are created by the worldwide exchange of domestic services, which connect women all over the world. When northern or Western women enter the paid labor market, they typically hire other women to care after their children and other dependents, most often what is considered a poorer women from a developing country. Migrant caregivers are regularly forced to abandon their own children in their home countries to be cared for by even destitute caregivers or family members who are already caring for others or working. The growth of global care networks has been impacted by a number of reasons. In affluent countries, the entry of women into the paid labor has resulted in a high demand for paid domestic employees, with no corresponding increases in public childcare or gender-based distribution of extra requirements.
She is a "liberal" in politics and an Agnostic in religion. She belongs to the American Sociological Association, the Sociologists for Women in Society, the American Gerontological Society, the American Federation of Teachers, the Sociological Research Association, and the International Association for Emotion Research.


=== Disengagement theory ===
Hochschild strongly opposes the disengagement theory. She argues that the disengagement theory is unfalsifiable because disengagement is universal and inevitable. She states that "disengagement must happen sometime in an individual's future if it isn't happening now". Thus, disengagement is not unique to older people. The disengagement theory falls short because it suggests that older people who are active are fundamentally engaged in society. Hochschild refutes this idea by arguing that being active is not the same as being engaged. 


== Honors ==
Hochschild has received Honorary Doctoral Degrees from Harvard University, 2021, Swarthmore College, 1993, Aalborg University, 2004 (Denmark), the University of Oslo, 2000, (Norway), the University of Lapland, 2012, (Finland),  Mount St. Vincent University, 2013 (Canada), Westminster College (Pennsylvania), 2018 (U.S.) and University of Lausanne, 2018 (Switzerland). She also received the Ulysses Medal from University College Dublin, 2015 Ireland,  and  was elected to the American Philosophical Society, 2021.
Hochschild was a finalist for the 2016 National Book Award for  Strangers In Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right and the book was a New York Times Bestseller.  The book was also listed by the New York Times as one of  "6 Books to Help Understand Trump's Win"  (November 9, 2016.)  She was also awarded a prize for this book (translated by Xia Fan and published by SSAP) in 2020 by the Beijing News Book Review,  Beijing, Mainland China.
For earlier work she was awarded the Ulysses Medal from University College Dublin, Ireland. Hochschild has also won Guggenheim, Fulbright and Mellon fellowships, and three awards granted by the American Sociological Association—the Charles Cooley Award (for The Managed Heart) the Jessie Bernard Award (for The Second Shift, The Time Bind and Global Woman), and the Award for Public Understanding of Sociology (for lifetime achievement). In awarding Hochschild the Jessie Bernard Award, the citation observed her "creative genius for framing questions and lines of insight, often condensed into memorable, paradigm-shifting words and phrases."
The Managed Heart, The Second Shift,   The Time Bind,  and Strangers In Their Own Land have been  named "Notable Books of the Year" by The New York Times.
The Outsourced Self: Intimate Life in Market Times was chosen by Publisher's Weekly as one of the "Best Books of 2012." The last chapter was excerpted in The New York Times (May 5, 2012).


== Quotes ==
"Most women without children spend much more time than men on housework; with children, they devote more time to both housework and child care. Just as there is a wage gap between men and women in the workplace, there is a "leisure gap" between them at home. Most women work one shift at the office or factory and a "second shift" at home.""The more anxious, isolated and time-deprived we are, the more likely we are to turn to paid personal services. To finance these extra services, we work longer hours. This leaves less time to spend with family, friends and neighbors; we become less likely to call on them for help, and they on us.""For many of us, work is the one place where we feel appreciated. The things that we long to experience at home- pride in our accomplishments, laughter and fun, relationships that aren't complex- we sometimes experience most often in the office. Bosses applaud us when we do a good job. Co-workers become a kind of family we feel we fit into.""The deal we made with the workplace wasn't made with families in mind: to work year-round in eight hour workdays through thick and thin, newborns, normal childhood illnesses, difficulties at school, elderly people getting sick. In whose interest is this? And can't we change it, making of two nine-hour days three six hour days, creating an extra job and making life livable for everyone?""Formerly, many men dominated women within marriage. Now, despite a much wider acceptance of women as workers, men dominate women anonymously outside the marriage. Patriarchy has not disappeared; it has changed form. In the old form, women were forced to obey an overbearing husband in the privacy of an unjust marriage. In the new form, the working single mother is economically abandoned by her former husband and ignored by a patriarchal society at large."“Men who shared the load at home seemed just as pressed for time as their wives, and torn between the demands of career and small children...But the majority of men did not share the load at home. Some refused outright. Others refused more passively, often offering a loving shoulder to lean on, an understanding ear as their working wife faced the conflict they both saw as hers.”


== Legacy ==
Within sociology, Hochschild is known as the founder of the sociology of emotion and, outside of it, as a public sociologist, contributing to publications, such as The New York Times op-ed page and Book Review, The Washington Post, Mother Jones, The American Prospect, Harper's Magazine,  The Progressive and The New York Review of Books.
Concepts developed by Hochschild, such as "emotional labor," "feeling rules", the "economy of gratitude," and  "global care chains" have been adopted by scholars in a range of disciplines. Capturing a range of research and debate, a collection published in 2011, At the Heart of Work and Family: Engaging the Ideas of Arlie Hochschild, critically explores some of her key concepts.
Another collection of papers devoted to her work is Pathways to Empathy: New Studies on Commodification, Emotional Labor and Time Binds (2013) edited by Gertraud Koch and Stephanie Everke Buchanan (Campus Verlag-Arbeit und Alltag, University of Chicago Press). The book is based on papers given at an "International Workshop in Honour of Hochschild" at Zeppelin University, Friedrichshafen, Germany (November 12–13, 2011). A monograph by  Madalena d'Oliviera-Martins entitled Arlie Russell Hochschild: Un Camino Hacia El Corazon De La Sociologia explores the main ideas found in her work.  (Centro de Investigaciones Sociologicas, Monograph 309, 242 ps,  Montalban, 8, 28014, Madrid, Spain, 2018).  Her work appears in 16 languages


== Books ==
Hochschild, Arlie Russell (1973). The Unexpected Community. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-936385-6.
The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human Feeling. Berkeley: University of California Press. 1983. ISBN 978-0-520-05454-7
The Second Shift: Working Families and the Revolution at Home. New York, N.Y: Viking. 1989. ISBN 978-0-670-82463-2
The Time Bind: When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes Work. New York: Metropolitan Books. 1997. ISBN 978-0-8050-4471-3
The Commercialization of Intimate Life: Notes from Home and Work. Berkeley: University of California Press. 2003. ISBN 978-0-520-21488-0.
Hochschild, Arlie Russell; Ehrenreich, Barbara, eds. (2003). Global Woman: Nannies, Maids, and Sex Workers in the New Economy. New York: Metropolitan Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-7509-0.
The Outsourced Self: Intimate Life in Market Times. New York: Metropolitan Books. 2012. ISBN 978-0-8050-8889-2
So How's the Family? and Other Essays. Berkeley: University of California Press. 2013. ISBN 978-0-520-27228-6.
Hochschild, Arlie Russell; Tronto, Joan; Gilligan, Carol (2013). Contre l'Indifférence Des Privilégiés: à Quoi Sert le Care (in French). Paris: Payot. ISBN 978-2-228-90877-1.
Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right. New York: The New Press. 2016. ISBN 978-1-62097-225-0.


=== Juvenile fiction ===
Coleen the Question Girl. London, Great Britain: Invisible Spaces of Parenthood. 2016. ISBN 978-1-367-45897-0.


== See also ==
Commercialization of love
Emotion work
Emotional labor
Time bind
The Second Shift
Feeling rules
Strangers in Their Own Land


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Adams, Bert N. and R.A. Sydie. 2001.  Sociological Theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.
Alis, David. 2009. "Travail Emotionnel, Dissonance Emotionnelle, et Contrefaçon De I’Intimité: Vingt-Cinq Ans Après La Publication de Managed Heart d’Arlie R. Hochschild." in Politiques de L’Intime, edited by I. Berrebi-Hoffmann. Paris, France: Editions La Decouverte.
Farganis, James. 2007. Readings in Social Theory: The Classic Tradition to Post-Modernism. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Garey, Anita Ilta and Karen V. Hansen. 2011. "Introduction: An Eye on Emotion in the Study of Families and Work." pp. 1–14 in At the Heart of Work and Family: Engaging the Ideas of Arlie Hochschild, edited by Anita Ilta Garey and Karen V. Hansen. New Brunswick: NJ.
Introduction by A. Grandey, in Emotional Labor in the 21st Century: Diverse Perspectives on Emotion Regulation at Work (2013) by Grandey, A., Diefendorff, J.A., & Rupp, D. (Eds.). New York, NY: Psychology Press/Routledge.
Greco, Monica, Carmen Leccardi, Roberta Sassatelli and Arlie Hochschild. "Roundtable on and with A. R. Hochschild, Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia," October/December 2014, pp. 819–840.
Hanninen, Vilma, Jukka Partanen, and Oili-Helena Ylijoki, eds. 2001. Sosiaalipsykologian Suunnannäyttäjiä. Tampere, Finland: Vastapaino.
Kimmel, Sherri. 2013. "A Playful Spirit," Swarthmore College Bulletin, April, A Playful Spirit - Swarthmore College Bulletin.
Koch, Gertraud, & Stephanie Everke Buchanan (eds). 2013. Pathways to Empathy: New Studies on Commodification, Emotional Labor and Time Binds. Campus Verlag-Arbeit und Alltag, University of Chicago Press. (The book is based on papers given at an "International Workshop in Honour of Arlie Russell Hochschild," Zeppelin University, Friedrichshafen, Germany (November 12–13, 2011).)
Mazzarela, Marete. 2014. "How to Turn Emotions into Capital," Svenska Dagbladet (February 27).
Sakiyama, Haruo. 2008. "Theoretical Contribution of Arlie Hochschild" (in Japanese). In Japanese Handbook of Sociology, edited by S. Inoue and K. Ito. Kyoto, Japan: Sekai-Shiso-Sya
Skucinska, Anna. 2002. "Nowe Obszary Utowardowienia" (in Czech).
Smith, Stephen Lloyd. 1999. "Arlie Hochschild: Soft-spoken Conservationist of Emotions: Review and Assessment of Arlie Hochschild's work," in Soundings, Issue 11 – Emotional Labour, Spring 1999, pp. 120–127.
Smith, Stephen. 2014. "Arlie Russell Hochschild: Spacious Sociologies of Emotion," Oxford Handbook of Sociology, Social Theory, and Organization Studies: Contemporary Currents, (edited by Paul Adler, Paul du Gay, Glenn Morgan and Mike Reed).
Wharton, Amy S. 2011. "The Sociology of Arlie Hochschild", Work and Occupations, 38(4), pp. 459–464.
Williams, Simon J. 1998. Chapter 18. pp. 240–251 in  Key Sociological Thinkers, edited by R. Stones. New York: New York University Press.
Wilson, N. H., & Lande, B. J. (n.d). Feeling Capitalism: A Conversation with Arlie Hochschild. Sage Publications, Ltd.
American Sociological Association. Arlie Hochschild Award Statement, [1]


== External links ==
Arlie Russell Hochschild page at UC Berkeley
Biography in Context
The Outsourced Life (NYTimes.com: May 5, 2012)
Key Pedagogic Thinkers
Emotional Labor Around the World: An Interview with Arlie Hochschild
What Drives Trump Supporters?: Sociologist Arlie Russell Hochschild on Anger & Mourning of the Right
Arlie Russell Hochschild on "Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the America" Part 2
"The Homes in Dorian's Path are in a High-Risk Area. Why Do They Cost So Much?" (The New York Times, September 4, 2019)
"How the White Working Class is Being Destroyed" (The New York Times, March 17, 2020)
When a Pandemic Strikes Americans Who Are Already Suffering (The New York Times, March 20, 2020)