Brad W. Setser is an American economist and former staff economist at the United States Department of the Treasury.  He worked at Roubini Global Economics Monitor ("RGE"), as Director of Global Research, where he co-authored the book "Bailouts or Bail-ins?" with Nouriel Roubini.


== Career ==
After leaving the RGE in 2007, Setser became a Fellow for international economics at the Council of Foreign Relations ("CoFR").  In 2009, he took a position with the National Economic Council, as Director of International Economics. In 2011, he moved to the United States Department of the Treasury, where he was the Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Economic Analysis where he worked on  Europe’s financial crisis, U.S. currency policy, financial sanctions,
commodity shocks, and Puerto Rico’s debt crisis  In 2015, he returned as the Steven A. Tananbaum Senior Fellow for international economics at the Council on Foreign Relations.  He is the author of the popular economics blog "Follow the Money" about global economic imbalances, which The Washington Post described in 2016 as a "must-read for those in the economics blogosphere".Setser has been interviewed in financial publications such as The Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times on U.S. international economic issues.Setser has also written opinion pieces including in The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal on U.S. international economic policy.In November 2020, Setser was named a member of the Joe Biden presidential transition Agency Review Team to support transition efforts related to the Office of the United States Trade Representative.


== Bibliography ==
Roubini, Nouriel; Setser, Brad (2004). Bailouts or Bail-ins?: Responding to Financial Crises in Emerging Economies. Pearson. ISBN 978-0881323719.Rosenberg, Christoph; Setser, Brad (2005). Debt-Related Vulnerabilities and Financial Crises. International Monetary Fund (IMF). ISBN 978-1589064256.Setser, Brad (2008). U.S. External Debt and Power (Council Special Report). Council on Foreign Relations. ISBN 978-0876094150.


== See also ==
Roubini Global Economics
Base erosion and profit shifting
Leprechaun economics
Ireland as a tax haven
EU illegal State aid case against Apple in Ireland
Double Irish, Single Malt, and CAIA


== References ==


== External links ==
"Follow the Money," Brad Setser's blog at the Council on Foreign Relations
Brad Setser C-SPAN
Bloomberg TV: Brad Setser