Charles Yuji Horioka (born September 7, 1956, in Boston, Massachusetts) is a Japanese-American economist residing in Japan.  Horioka received his B.A. and Ph.D. degrees from Harvard University and is currently Professor at the Research Institute for Economics and Business Administration, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan. He is concurrently Distinguished Research Professor at the Asian Growth Research Institute (Kitakyushu City, Japan), Invited Professor at the Institute of Social and Economic Research, Osaka University (Osaka, Japan), and Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, Massachusetts).  Previously, he taught at Stanford, Columbia, Kyoto, and Osaka Universities and the University of the Philippines, Diliman, where he was Vea Family Professor of Technology and Evolutionary Economics Centennial. He is currently President of the Society of Economics of the Household (SEHO), Council Member of the International Association for Research on Income and Wealth (IARIW), and Co-Editor of the "Review of Economics of the Household." He served as Co-Editor of the "International Economic Review" for 15 years (from 1998 until 2013).
In his article with Martin Feldstein, "Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows", published in the Economic Journal in 1980, Horioka documented a positive correlation between long-term savings and investment rates across countries.  This result has come to be known as the Feldstein–Horioka Puzzle or Paradox and the article is one of the most cited in international finance.  His specialties are macroeconomics, household and family economics, the Japanese economy, and the Asian economies, and he has written numerous scholarly articles on consumption, saving, and bequest behavior and parent-child relations in Japan, the United States, China, India, Korea, and Asia more generally.
In 2001, Horioka was awarded the Seventh Japanese Economic Association Nakahara Prize (the Japanese equivalent of the John Bates Clark Medal), which is given annually to the most outstanding Japanese economist aged 45 or younger. According to the Research Papers in Economics (RePEc)/IDEAS rankings, he ranks sixth among economists living in Japan and has about 9000 Google Scholar citations.


== References ==
Biographic Notes – Institute of Social and Economic Research, Osaka University
Saving and Investment in the Long Run