Eileen Margaret Hunt Botting (born 1971) is an American political theorist and professor of political science. She works on political thought from the 17th century to the present. She is a professor at the University of Notre Dame and has published four solo-authored books and edited another five books.


== Biography ==
Botting, a Maine native, studied English, Philosophy, and Ancient Greek at Bowdoin College. In 1992 she received a Marshall Scholarship to continue her studies in the United Kingdom, where she studied philosophy from 1993 to 1995 at St. John's College, Cambridge. In 2001, she earned her Ph.D. with distinction at Yale University in the Department of Political Science, with a focus on feminist political philosophy and the history of modern political thought.  
In 2009 she was the recipient of the Colonial Society of Massachusetts Award from the New England Regional Fellowship Consortium; in 2012, the triennial Edition Award from the Society for the Study of American Women Writers, with Sarah L. Houser, for their scholarly edition of Reminiscences and Traditions of Boston by Hannah Mather Crocker;  in 2014, the Okin-Young award for the best article published in feminist political theory in the previous year; in 2015, an American Council of Learned Societies Fellowship for her project Frankenstein and the Question of Human Development; and in 2019, a recipient of an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation book grant in the Public Understanding of Science, Technology, and Economics Program to support her work on Political Science Fictions after 'Frankenstein': Mary Shelley and the Politics of Making Artificial Life and Intelligence. This is the subject of her fourth solo-authored book, Artificial Life After Frankenstein, published in December 2020. She has also edited the two-volume set, Portraits of Wollstonecraft (2021), for Bloomsbury Philosophy.


== Publications ==


=== Authored ===
Artificial Life After Frankenstein, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2020
Mary Shelley and the Rights of the Child: Political Philosophy in 'Frankenstein', University of Pennsylvania Press, 2017
Wollstonecraft, Mill, and Women's Human Rights, Yale University Press, 2016
Family Feuds: Wollstonecraft, Burke, and Rousseau on the Transformation of the Family, The State University of New York Press, 2006


=== Edited ===
with Jill Locke, Feminist Interpretations of Alexis de Tocqueville, Penn State, 2009
with Sarah L. Houser, Reminiscences and Traditions of Boston by Hannah Mather Crocker, NEHGS, 2011
A Vindication of the Rights of Woman by Mary Wollstonecraft, with new scholarly essays by Virginia Sapiro, Norma Clarke, Ruth Abbey, Eileen Hunt Botting, and Madeline Cronin, Yale University Press, 2014
with Sandrine Berges and Alan Coffee, The Wollstonecraftian Mind, Routledge, 2019
Portraits of Wollstonecraft, 2 vols., Bloomsbury Philosophy, 2021


== References ==