Gad Barzilai (Hebrew: גד ברזילי‎; born 1958) is a full professor of law, political science and international studies, famous for his work on the politics of law, comparative law and politics, human rights and communities. Barzilai published heretofore 18 books and 173 articles in major academic refereed journals and publishing houses. He has been a full professor of law, societies and justice, and international studies at University of Washington, and the University of Haifa Faculty of Law. Gad Barzilai has served as the Dean of the Faculty of Law (2012-2017) and starting from November 2016 he is the Vice Provost of University of Haifa.
He was a professor of political science and law at Tel Aviv University where he served (1996-2004) as its co-founder and co-director of the Law, Society and Politics Graduate Program.


== Biography ==
Barzilai was born on January 11, 1958 in Tel Aviv to parents who had survived the Holocaust. He studied History, Judaism and Political Science at Bar-Ilan University, Law at Tel Aviv University, and in 1987 he received his PhD from the Hebrew University in Jerusalem which awarded him several prestigious prizes including Fulbright. After completing his PhD and LLB [JD] he studied quantitative research methods at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and completed a post doctorate at Yale University. Later he continued to teach at Yale University before deciding to return to Israel.
He served as a professor at Tel Aviv University in the political science department and the law school. Barzilai was the first founding director (1999–2002) of the newly established international Dan David Prize, which is among the three large prize foundations in the world, bestowing international prizes and scholarships for academic and scientific international excellence. In 2004 he moved to University of Washington where he has been a professor in the Law, Societies, and Justice Program, Comparative Law and Society Studies Center, and in the Jackson School of International Studies. In 2012 he was elected and serves as the Dean of the Faculty of Law at University of Haifa.    
Barzilai was the co-founder and co-chair of the Israeli Association of Law and Society. He is a board member of the Law and Society Association (Class of 2006), American Journal of Political Science (1998–2003), Association of Israel Studies (1993–1996, 2007– ), Israel Studies Forum (2004–  ), and the Journal of Comparative Studies (2006– ). He is active in international, Israeli and Israeli-Palestinian human rights organizations and has advised senior politicians and NGOs on issues of law and politics. Barzilai was elected in 2011 as the President of the Association for Israel Studies and served as its President (2011-2013).Gad Barzilai is best known for his critical analysis of law as a dimension in political power, which should be understood through using combined methodologies of socio-political-legal studies. His work emphasizes the importance of legal pluralism, political elite, critical communitarianism, cultural relativism and political power in local, state and global sites. Barzilai has published numerous books and articles on these issues.


== References ==


== External links ==
Professor Gad Barzilai's official home page
Gad Barzilai website at University of Haifa
The Minerva Center
Gad Barzilai's personal home page at University of Washington
Gad Barzilai's on twitter
Gad Barzilai on RSS feed
Prof. Gad Barzilai was named in the WorldWideLearn.com list of the Top 50 Law Professors on TwitterSelected Books

Gad Barzilai, 1996, Wars, Internal Conflicts and Political Order: A Jewish Democracy in the Middle East, Albany: State University of New York Press
Gad Barzilai and David Nachmias, 1998, Governmental Lawyering in the Political Sphere: Advocating the Leviathan, Israel Studies 3 (2): 30-46
Gad Barzilai, 2003, Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press
Gad Barzilai, 2007 Law and Religion, Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing LtD.
Gad Barzilai, 2008 Beyond Relativism: Where is Political Power in Legal Pluralism, Theoretical Inquiries in Law 9 (2)
Gad Barzilai, 2010 The Attorney General and the State Prosecutor: Is Institutional Separation Warranted?, Jerusalem: The Israel Democracy InstituteSelected Articles 

Law is Politics
The Case of Azmi Bishara: Political Immunity and Freedom in Israel
Fantasies of Liberalism and Liberal Jurisprudence: State Law, Politics, and the Israeli-Arab-Palestinian Community
Courts as Hegemonic Institutions: The Israeli Supreme Court in a Comparative Perspective
War, Democracy, and Internal Conflict: Israel in a Comparative Perspective
Israel and Future Borders: A Multidimensional Approach to the Assessment of a Dynamic Process
Social Protest and the Absence of Legalistic Discourse: In the Quest for New Language of Protest
The Ambivalence of Litigation: A Criticism of Power
Cultured Technology: Internet and Religious Fundamentalism
Culture of Patriarchy in Law: Violence from Antiquity to Modernity
The Redemptive Principle of Particularistic Obligations: A Legal Political Inquiry
National Security in Courts and Law: A Theoretical and Comparative Analysis