James McGill Buchanan Jr. (; October 3, 1919 – January 9, 2013) was an American economist known for his work on public choice theory (included in his most famous work, co-authored with Gordon Tullock, The Calculus of Consent, 1962), for which he received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1986. Buchanan's work initiated research on how politicians' and bureaucrats' self-interest, utility maximization, and other non-wealth-maximizing considerations affect their decision-making. He was a member of the Board of Advisors of The Independent Institute as well as of the Institute of Economic Affairs, a member (and for a time president) of the Mont Pelerin Society, a Distinguished Senior Fellow of the Cato Institute, and professor at George Mason University.


== Background ==
Buchanan was born in Murfreesboro, Tennessee, the eldest child of James and Lila (Scott) Buchanan, a family of Scotch-Irish descent.  He was a grandson of John P. Buchanan, a governor of Tennessee in the 1890s.  He attended Middle Tennessee State Teachers College (since 1965 known as Middle Tennessee State University) in 1940 by living at home and working on the farm.  Buchanan completed his M.S. at the University of Tennessee in 1941. He served in the United States Navy on the staff of Admiral Chester W. Nimitz in Honolulu during World War II, when he met Anne Bakke, whom he married on October 5, 1945. Anne, of Norwegian descent, was working as a nurse at the military base in Hawaii. She died in 2005.
Buchanan identified as a socialist in his youth and was unaware of the University of Chicago's strong market-oriented approach to economics. His studies there, particularly under Frank H. Knight, converted him to "a zealous advocate of the market order". Buchanan received his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1948 with a thesis on "Fiscal Equity in a Federal State", which was heavily influenced by Knight. It was also at Chicago that he first read and found enlightening the work of Swedish economist Knut Wicksell. Photographs of Knight and Wicksell hung on his office walls ever after.
Buchanan's original political and economic views leaned heavily socialist and were reinforced by his stint spent in the Navy. While serving in the military, Buchanan felt soldiers from the south and west regions were discriminated against in favor of soldiers from the New England region. He believed the soldiers from the north-east universities were viewed as a part of the establishment and received promotions to officer because of their affiliations. Buchanan would state in an interview with Karen Horn, “Out of the 20 boys from the establishment universities, 12 or 13 were picked. against a background of a total of 600. It was overtly discriminatory towards those of us who were not members of the establishment,”. Buchanan went so far as to say he would have become a communist had he been approached by a recruiter. Buchanan would go on to say that his socialist views were less "pro government" and more "anti-big business". His ideology did not change until attending The University of Chicago, where he began studying under Frank Knight. Then he started to advocate for a free market system. 


== Career ==
Buchanan was the founder of the new Virginia school of political economy.
He taught at the University of Virginia from 1956-1968, where he founded the Thomas Jefferson Center for Studies in Political Economy. From 1955 to 1956 he was a Fulbright Scholar in Italy.
He taught at UCLA 1968–1969, followed by Virginia Tech 1969-1983, where he held the title Distinguished Professor of Economics and founded the Center for the Study of Public Choice (CSPC). In 1983, a conflict with Economics Department head Daniel M. Orr came to a head, and Buchanan took the CSPC to its new home at George Mason University, where he eventually retired with emeritus status.
He also taught at Florida State University (1951-1956) and the University of Tennessee.
In 1969 Buchanan became the first director of the Center for the Study of Public Choice. He was president of the Southern Economic Association in 1963 and of the Western Economic Association in 1983 and 1984, and vice president of the American Economic Association in 1971.
In 1988, Buchanan returned to Hawaii for the first time since World War II and gave a series of lectures later published by the University Press.


== Personal life and death ==
Buchanan died January 9, 2013, in Blacksburg, Virginia, at age 93. The New York Times commented that the Nobel Prize-winning economist who championed public choice theory influenced a "generation of conservative thinking about deficits, taxes and the size of government". The Badische Zeitung (Freiburg) called Buchanan, who showed how politicians undermine fair and simple tax systems, the "founder of the new political economy". He and his wife, Ann Bakke, a nurse, had no children, but held close family ties with his sisters and nephews.


== Awards ==
1986: Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for "development of the contractual and constitutional bases for the theory of economic and political decision making"
2001:  Honorary doctoral degree from Universidad Francisco Marroquín, in Guatemala City, Guatemala, for contribution to economics
2006 National Humanities Medal "...honors individuals or groups whose work has deepened the nation's understanding of the humanities and broadened our citizens' engagement with history, literature, languages, philosophy, and other humanities subjects."


== Legacy ==
Buchanan's legacy lives on through the Political Economic Research Institute (PERI) at Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU) which provides fellowships for both undergraduate and graduate students. PERI at MTSU works with MTSU's Honors College for its undergrad fellows. The Honors college also has its own Buchanan Fellowship.  These fellowships honor Buchanan's academic achievement in many subjects besides economics. With respect to PERI's graduate fellowships, these are motived by academic work in the field of economics. 


== Thinking ==
Buchanan's work focused on public finance, the public debt, voting, rigorous analysis of the theory of logrolling, macroeconomics, constitutional economics, and libertarian theory.


=== Approach to economic analysis ===
Buchanan was largely responsible for the rebirth of political economy as a scholarly pursuit. He emphasized that public policy cannot be considered solely in terms of distribution, but is instead always a matter of setting the rules of the game that engender a pattern of exchange and distribution. His work in public choice theory is often interpreted as the quintessential instance of economics imperialism; however, Amartya Sen has argued that Buchanan should not be identified with economics imperialism, since he has done more than most to introduce ethics, legal political thinking, and indeed social thinking into economics. Crucial to understanding Buchanan's system of thought is the distinction he made between politics and policy. Politics is about the rules of the game, where policy is focused on strategies that players adopt within a given set of rules. "Questions about what are good rules of the game are in the domain of social philosophy, whereas questions about the strategies that players will adopt given those rules is the domain of economics, and it is the play between the rules (social philosophy) and the strategies (economics) that constitutes what Buchanan refers to as constitutional political economy".In 1972, like George McGovern, Buchanan supported a 100% marginal tax rate on all inheritances above a certain amount.When conducting his economic analysis, Buchanan used methodological individualism, rational choice, individual utility maximization, and politics as exchange.Buchanan's important contribution to constitutionalism is his development of the sub-discipline of constitutional economics.According to Buchanan the ethic of constitutionalism is a key for constitutional order and "may be called the idealized Kantian world" where the individual "who is making the ordering, along with substantially all of his fellows, adopts the moral law as a general rule for behaviour". Buchanan rejects "any organic conception of the state as superior in wisdom to the citizens of this state". This philosophical position forms the basis of constitutional economics. Buchanan believed that every constitution is created for at least several generations of citizens. Therefore, it must be able to balance the interests of the state, society, and each individual.Buchanan's work Cost and Choice (see below in List of publications) is often overlooked for its contributions in defining the parameters of opportunity cost. In it, he writes that the costs to individuals determine what the price of a good or service is. For example, the physical work that is required to hunt an animal as well as the price of the tools necessary to hunt it and the time spent hunting all play a factor in the price an individual places on the meat. The asking price of the meat will vary from person to person because the input costs required for each person are not the same.
Buchanan is considered to be a quasi-member of the Austrian school of economics, not formally associated with the school but sharing many common beliefs. As Buchanan puts it: "I certainly have a great deal of affinity with Austrian economics and I have no objections to being called an Austrian. Friedrich Hayek and Mises might consider me an Austrian but, surely some of the others would not." Buchanan went on to say that: "I didn't become acquainted with Mises until I wrote an article on individual choice and voting in the market in 1954. After I had finished the first draft I went back to see what Mises had said in Human Action. I found out, amazingly, that he had come closer to saying what I was trying to say than anybody else."


=== Public choice theory ===
James Buchanan is considered the architect of public choice theory. His work within Public Choice earned him the Nobel Prize in Economic Science in 1986. Public choice theory focuses on people's decision making process within the political realm.  Buchanan used both the fields of economics and political science to help develop Public Choice.  The same principles used to interpret people's decisions in a  market setting are applied to voting, lobbying, campaigning, and even candidates.  Buchanan maintains that a person's first instinct is to make their decisions based upon their own self-interest, which varied from previous models where government officials acted in constituents' best interest.  Buchanan explains public choice theory as "politics without romance" because, he says, many of the promises made in politics are intended to appear concerned with the interest of others, but in reality are the products of selfish ulterior motives.  According to this view, political decisions, on both sides of the voting booth, are rarely made with the intention of helping anyone but the one making the decision.  Buchanan argues that by analyzing the behaviors of voters and politicians that their actions could become easily predicted.


== Works ==
Buchanan's works include:

Public Principles of Public Debt, 1958
Fiscal Theory and Political Economy, 1960
The Calculus of Consent (with Gordon Tullock), 1962
Politics of Bureaucracy by Gordon Tullock, foreword by James M. Buchanan (Washington: Public Affairs Press, 1965)
Public Finance in Democratic Process, 1967
Demand and Supply of Public Goods, 1968
Cost and Choice, 1969
The Limits of Liberty, 1975
Democracy in Deficit (with Richard E. Wagner), 1977
Freedom in Constitutional Contract, 1978
What Should Economists Do? 1979
The Power to Tax (with Geoffrey Brennan), 1980
The Reason of Rules (with Geoffrey Brennan), 1985
Liberty, Market and State, 1985
Why I, Too, Am Not a Conservative: The Normative Vision of Classical Liberalism (Cheltenham UK: Edward Elgar), 2005
Economics from the Outside In: Better than Plowing and Beyond (College Station: Texas A&M Press), 2007A listing of Buchanan's publications from 1949 to 1986 can be found at the Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 1987, 89(1), pp. 17–37.


== See also ==
Social contract


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Atkinson, Anthony B. "James M. Buchanan's Contributions to Economics". Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 1987, vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 5–15.
Boettke, P.J., Candela, R.A. Where Chicago meets London: James M. Buchanan, Virginia Political Economy, and cost theory. Public Choice (2020).
Boettke, P., Kroencke, J. The real purpose of the program: a case study in James M. Buchanan's efforts at academic entrepreneurship to “save the books” in economics. Public Choice (2020).
Brennan, G., Kliemt, H., and Tollison, R.D. (eds.)  Method and Morals in Constitutional Economics: Essays in Honor of James M. Buchanan. Berlin:  Springer, 2002. ISBN 9783642075513
Horn, Karen Ilse. "Roads to Wisdom, Conversations with Ten Nobel Laureates in Economics",94-95 Edward Elgar, 2011.
Kasper, Sherryl. The Revival of Laissez-Faire in American Macroeconomic Theory: A Case Study of Its Pioneers, Chapter 6. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2002. ISBN 9781840646061
Leeson, Peter.  "Buchanan, James M. (1919– )." Encyclopedia of Libertarianism, pp. 40–51. Ronald Hamowy, ed.  Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute, 2008. ISBN 9781412965804
Marciano, Alain. 2020. "Buchanan, Popular Myths, and the Social Responsibility of Economists." Journal of the Southern Economic Association.
MacLean, Nancy. Democracy In Chains: The Deep History Of The Radical Right's Stealth Plan For America.  Viking Press, 2017.  ISBN 9781101980965
Meadowcroft, John.  James M. Buchanan. London: Continuum, 2011. ISBN 9781501301513
Munger, M. Moral community and moral order: Buchanan's theory of obligation. Public Choice (2020).
Palda, Filip. A Better Kind of Violence: Chicago Political Economy, Public Choice, and the Quest for an Ultimate Theory of Power. Kingston: Cooper-Wolfling, 2016. ISBN 9780987788078
Pittard, Homer. The First Fifty Years, pp. 136, 173. Murfreesboro, TN: Middle Tennessee State College, 1961.
Reisman, David A. The Political Economy of James Buchanan. Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 9780333476390
Vanberg, V.J. J. M. Buchanan's contractarian constitutionalism: political economy for democratic society. Public Choice (2020).


== External links ==

 Quotations related to James M. Buchanan at Wikiquote
James Buchanan Papers
Biography at GMU
James M. Buchanan publications indexed by Microsoft Academic
Ideological Profile from Econ Journal Watch
Appearances on C-SPAN
James M. Buchanan, The Collected Works of James M. Buchanan, vol. 7 (The Limits of Liberty: Between Anarchy and Leviathan) [1975]
Member of the Board of Advisors at The Independent Institute
YouTube Reflections on the Life and Work of James Buchanan
"James M. Buchanan (1919–2013)". The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.). Liberty Fund. 2013.
'The Hobbes Problem: From Machiavelli to Buchanan' by Deirdre McCloskey.
Dr James M. Buchanan at Find a Grave
Editors, Biography.com (2015). "James M. Buchanan Biography". bio. A&E Television Networks. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved April 26, 2016.CS1 maint: extra text: authors list (link)
Lynn Parramore, Meet the Economist Behind the One Percent's Stealth Takeover of America, Institute for New Economic Thinking, 2018
James M. Buchanan Jr. on Nobelprize.org