Javier Gerardo Milei (Buenos Aires, Argentina; 22 October 1970) is an Argentine libertarian economist, politician, author, radio conductor,preacher public speaker and recently became a deputy, sympathetic to the Austrian School of economic thought. He became widely known for his regular TV appearances where he has been critical of Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, Mauricio Macri and Alberto Fernández administrations. Milei considers himself to be a "short-term minarchist", although "philosophically an anarcho-capitalist".
Milei will compete for a place in the Chamber of Deputies for Buenos Aires for the Avanza Libertad coalition. He said "Before raising a tax, or creating a tax, I'll amputate my arm".


== Biography ==


=== Early life and youth ===
He was born in 1970 to a bus driver, in a family of Italian descent.  Milei did high school at Cardenal Copello and decided to pursue a career in economics at the age of 12 after José Alfredo Martínez de Hoz's Economy Administration led the country to a devastating hyperinflation. In late adolescence and early adulthood he was a goalkeeper for Chacarita Juniors until 1989. He also sang in the band "Everest," which played mostly Rolling Stones covers. In a TV show he declared that he currently never visits his parents and that "both of them are dead" to him. To support this view he recalled his college time in which his parents made his life miserable.


=== Career ===
Having obtained an economics degree at the private Belgrano University (Licentiate) and received two Master's Degrees at the Instituto de Desarrollo Económico y Social (IDES) and the private Torcuato di Tella University. He became a chief economist at Máxima AFJP (a private pension company), a head economist at Estudio Broda (a financial advising company) and a government consultant at the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes. He used to be a senior economist at HSBC as well.,He was economic adviser to Antonio Domingo Bussi when the latter, although indicted for crimes against humanity committed during the dictatorship, was elected deputy in 1999.Since 2012, he leads the division of Economic Studies, Fundación Acordar, a think tank of national scope. He is also a member of the B20, the Economic Policy Group of International Chamber of Commerce (an advisor to the G20), and the World Economic Forum. He is a specialist in economic growth and has been professor of several economic subjects in Argentine universities and abroad. He has authored 9 books. Currently, he works for Argentine tycoon Eduardo Eurnekián.
For more than 21 years he has been University Professor of Macroeconomics, Economics of Growth, Microeconomics and Mathematics for Economists. Since 2016 he has been trying to merge Austrian economics concepts with Monetarism concepts, as he understands Ben Bernanke was the greatest central banker ever, a point of view rejected by austrian economists." Besides his academic career, Milei is the host of his own radio show named "Demoliendo mitos" (Demolishing myths), with frequent participations of the alberdian economist and businessman Gustavo Lazzari and other personalities such as the also alberdian lawyer Pablo Torres Barthe and the libertarian political scientist María Zaldívar.


=== Political career ===
Founder of the party "Freedom Moves Forward", Javier Milei claims to be anarcho-capitalist. He campaigns for a total ban on abortion, the liberalisation of the carrying of arms, the abolition of the central bank, the repeal of capital control measures and opposes the introduction of new taxes. He disputes the existence of climate change.He surprised in the September 2021 primary elections, coming third in the city of Buenos Aires with 13.66% of the vote. Campaigning under the slogan "I didn't come here to lead lambs but to awaken lions", he denounced the "political caste", which he said was made up of "useless, parasitic politicians who have never worked ".He is inspired by Jair Bolsonaro and Donald Trump and shows his closeness to the Spanish political party Vox. He also refers to Carlos Menem, President of Argentina from 1989 to 1999, and his Minister of the Economy Domingo Cavallo.


=== Personal life ===
Milei has been nicknamed "el Peluca" (the Wig) because of his eccentric hairstyle. 
 He has repeatedly said he does not comb his hair, and for this reason his hairstyle has received significant media attention. Regarding his romantic life he has suggested in a La Nación interview that he is a champion of free love, and in a local TV program stated that he took part in several threesomes and that he is a Tantra instructor, in his words being "capable of remaining three months without ejaculating" (sic). Nevertheless he identifies as a Catholic, who rejects the Magisterium of the Church. With regards to abortion, he has publicly expressed a strong pro-life position.He owns five english mastiffs, the progenitor being 'Conan,' whom he regards as his 'son', and four of Conan's pups called Milton (for Milton Friedman), Murray (for Murray Rothbard), Robert and Lucas (both for Robert Lucas).
.


== Criticism ==
It has been pointed out that one important issue is that Milei makes constant use of mathematical formulae and charts throughout his writings to illustrate his points, which clearly contradicts the skeptical Austrian views on the usage of mathematics in economics, regarded by them as a social science. This is the main obstacle to frame Milei as an 'Austrian' economist. Although his conceptual framework is decidedly Austrian, his methodology is overall not.He has distinguished himself by his sometimes aggressive way of debating and his recurrent use of foul language, leading to several controversies. On 25 August 2021, he insulted the head of the government of the city of Buenos Aires,  Horacio Rodríguez Larreta, calling him a "fucking leftist", a "bald shit", and saying that he could "crush" him. He justified himself by saying that Horacio Rodríguez Larreta was using "public funds to persecute opponents".'


== Radio ==


== Books ==
Lecturas de Economía en tiempos de Kirchnerismo (in English; Economic Reading in Kirchnerism government era, 2014), ISBN 978-987-3773-00-6
Política Económica Contrarreloj (In English: Economic Politics time trial, 2014), ISBN 9789874513328
El retorno al sendero de la Decadencia Argentina (In English: The return to the road of the Argentinian Decadence, 2015), ISBN 9789873677182
Maquinita, Infleta y Devaluta (In english: Machinita, Infleta and Devaluta, 2016), with Diego Giacomini. ISBN 9789873677441
Otra vez sopa: maquinita, infleta y devaluta: ensayos de economía monetaria para el caso argentino (In English: Once again soup: machinita, infleta and devaluta: monetary economy essays for the Argentine case, 2017), with Diego Giacomini. ISBN 9789876278140
Desenmascarando la mentira keynesiana. Keynes, Friedman y el triunfo de la Escuela Austriaca. (In English: Unmasking the Keynesian lie. Keynes, Friedman and the triumph of the Austrian School. 2018), ISBN 9788472097278
Libertad, libertad, libertad. (In English: Liberty, Liberty, Liberty, 2019), with Diego Giacomini. ISBN 9789505567393
Pandenomics. La economía que viene en tiempos de megarrecesión, inflación y crisis global. (In English: Pandenomics: The economy that comes in times of mega recession, inflation and global crisis, 2020) ISBN 9789505567799


== Selected academic articles ==
(2004) 'Real Exchange Rate Targeting. ¿Trilema Monetario o Control de Capitales? La Política Fiscal', Revista de Economía y Estadística, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Facultad de Ciencias Económicas, Instituto de Economía y Finanzas, vol. 0(2), pages 63–87, January.
(2014) 'De los picapiedras a los supersónicos: Maravillas del progreso tecnológico con convergencia', Revista Actualidad Económica, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Facultad de Ciencias Económicas, Instituto de Economía y Finanzas, vol. 0(83), pages 5–18.
(2017) 'Ensayos Monetarios para Economías Abiertas: El Caso Argentino' (with Diego Giacomini), Revista Actualidad Económica, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Facultad de Ciencias Económicas, Instituto de Economía y Finanzas, vol. 0(91), pages 5–24.


== References ==


== External links ==
Javier Milei on Instagram
Javier Milei on Twitter
Javier Milei on Facebook