José Luis Espert  (born November 21, 1961) is an Argentine economist and politician who is known to be one of the strongest supporters of the economic liberalism in Argentina.Espert proposes to deepen the commercial opening with the world and attacks against the limitations of Mercosur. He is against the "corporations that devour the country": as an anti-system, he proposes that the country "change the system for another." With his ideology, he seeks to position himself as the only representative of liberalism.Espert considers himself a "common citizen", criticizes Mauricio Macri and Alberto Fernandez and claims to be the opposition figure to Kirchnerism.


== Education and career ==
He was born in Pergamino to a Catalan father and an Argentine mother. His father, who died in 2018, was a prominent businessman linked to the rural sector.
He studied economics at the University of Buenos Aires (UBA). He earned a master's degree in economics at the University of CEMA (UCEMA), and a Master's in Statistics at the National University of Tucumán.
He started working at the Miguel Ángel Broda firm where he was a monetary policy analyst, later to become a chief economist at the same institution. He also worked as an econometrist at Estudio Arriazu firm and was a partner at Econométrica S.A. In 2000, he founded his own firm, Estudio Espert, which offers macroeconomic consultancy and Asset Management.
He is a member of the Argentine Association of Political Economy (Asociación Argentina de Economía Política). He was Econometrics professor at UBA and Public Finances professor at UCEMA.
He is a columnist in different newspapers, such as La Nación and El País from Uruguay. In 2015, he was interviewed by José del Río at a La Nación program, which became the second-most viewed interview of the year.


== Politics ==

He is very critical of the economic policies of the second presidency of Carlos Menem and the governments of Fernando de la Rúa, Eduardo Duhalde, Néstor Kirchner, Cristina Fernández and Mauricio Macri.
In December 2018 he officially launched his presidential campaign for the 2019 Argentine general election.Espert's proposals consist of lowering public spending, forming an agency similar to the US Drug Control Administration to combat drug trafficking, lowering taxes, decriminalizing personal marijuana use, decriminalizing abortion and reforming the education system through school vouchers.
He opposes industrial promotion regimes and believes that the right to strike has gone too far, harmed even the worker himself. Therefore, he seeks a labor, tax and state reform in general. He also showed himself in favor of privatizing inefficient state companies and the retirement system, to turn it into an individual capitalization system such as in Chile.


== Books ==
Argentina Devoured (La Argentina Devorada) (2017)
The Complicit Society (La Sociedad Cómplice) (2019)
Invisible Chains (Cadenas Invisibles) (2021)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site