Linda Yueh is a British/American economist, broadcaster, and author, born in Taiwan and of dual British and American citizenship. Yueh is an Adjunct Professor of Economics at London Business School, and a Fellow in Economics at St Edmund Hall, Oxford University. She was also a Visiting Professor at Peking University and associated with both the Centre for Economic Performance and IDEAS research centres at the London School of Economics (LSE). She is a TV and radio presenter, including for BBC programmes such as Radio 4 Analysis, Business Daily on BBC World Service, and Radio 4 Today programme. From 2013 to 2015, she was Chief Business Correspondent and a Contributing Editor for BBC News when she hosted Talking Business with Linda Yueh, as well as former Economics Editor at Bloomberg Television.


== Background ==
Yueh was born in Taipei and emigrated to the United States around 1982 when she was five years old. She has a BA from Yale University, a Master of Public Policy from Harvard University, a JD from New York University School of Law and a D.Phil in Economics and MA from St Edmund Hall, Oxford.


== Career ==
Yueh has been a corporate lawyer at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison resident in New York City, Beijing, and Hong Kong.She was previously a non-executive director of two FTSE-listed companies, a board member of London & Partners, the official promotion agency of London, and an adviser to the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC). Yueh is currently a non-executive director at Rentokil Initial, she has held this role since November 2017.She is an External Trustee of the Coutts Foundation and also on the advisory board of OMFIF. She serves on the supervisory Policy Committee of the Centre for Economic Performance (CEP) at the London School of Economics (LSE). She is also the Chair of the Royal Commonwealth Society and Malaria No More UK.In September 2020, she was named an advisor to the British Board of Trade.


== International activities ==
Yueh has been an advisor to the World Bank, the European Commission, the Asian Development Bank, and the World Economic Forum at Davos.


== Academia ==
Yueh has had several dozen scholarly articles published while teaching at Oxford University, London Business School, London School of Economics and Political Science and Peking University where she holds a visiting professorship in economics.


== Books ==
The Great Economists: How Their Ideas Can Help Us Today. Viking. /What Would the Great Economists Do? How Twelve Brilliant Minds Would Solve Today's Biggest Problems. Picador.
China's Growth: The Making of an Economic Superpower. Oxford University Press.
The Economy of China. Edward Elgar Publishing.
China and Globalisation: Critical Concepts in Globalisation. Routledge. (editor).
Enterprising China: Business, Economic, and Legal Developments since 1979. Oxford University Press.
The Law and Economics of Globalisation. Edward Elgar Publishing. (editor).
Macroeconomics. Cengage Learning. (co-author).
The Future of Asian Trade and Growth: Economic Development with the Emergence of China. Routledge. (editor).
Globalisation and Economic Growth in China. Routledge. (co-editor).


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
LSE profile