Ngaire Tui Woods CBE (; born 1962/1963) is the founding dean of the Blavatnik School of Government and professor of Global Economic Governance at the University of Oxford. She founded the Global Economic Governance Programme (currently directed by Emily Jones) and is the co-founder (with Robert Keohane) of the Oxford–Princeton Global Leaders Fellowship programme. She was born in New Zealand.


== Education ==
Woods attended Rangitoto College in Mairangi Bay, Auckland, where she was head girl in 1980. She then attended the University of Auckland where she graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics and a Bachelor of Laws degree. She studied at Balliol College, Oxford, as a Rhodes Scholar, completing Master of Philosophy and Doctor of Philosophy degrees in international relations.
From 1990 to 1992, she was a junior research fellow at New College, Oxford, and subsequently taught at the Government Department at Harvard University before taking up her fellowship at University College, Oxford.


== Career ==
Woods was named inaugural Dean of the Blavatnik School of Government in 2011. Her research focuses on global economic governance, the challenges of globalization, global development, and the role of international institutions.
Since 2013, Woods has written monthly commentaries on economic and regulatory policy for Project Syndicate, an international media organization.
In early 2021, Woods was appointed by the G20 to the High Level Independent Panel (HLIP) on financing the global commons for pandemic preparedness and response, co-chaired by Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, Tharman Shanmugaratnam and Lawrence Summers.


== Other activities ==


=== Corporate boards ===
Arup, non-executive member of the board of directors
Rio Tinto, independent non-executive director


=== Non-profit organizations ===
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), member of the international advisory panel
Mo Ibrahim Foundation, member of the board
Oxonia, member of the academic and policy board
Ditchley Foundation, member of the board of governors
Rhodes Trust, member of the board of trustees (since 2009)
Center for Global Development, member of the advisory group
Center for International Governance Innovation, member of the board
Europaeum, member of the board of trustees
World Economic Forum (WEF), co-chair of the Global Future Council on Technology, Values and Policy
Trilateral Commission, member of the European GroupIn the past, Ngaire Woods has served as an advisor to the IMF board, to the UNDP Human Development Report, and to the Commonwealth Heads of Government. She is a former regular presenter of the Analysis programme for BBC Radio 4, and in 1998 presented her own BBC television series on public policy. She has also served as a member of the IMF European Regional Advisory Group.


== Books ==
Woods, N. The Globalizers: the IMF, the World Bank, and their Borrowers, Cornell University Press, March 2006; ISBN 0-8014-4424-1
Woods, N. The Political Economy of Globalization, Macmillan, 2000
Woods, N. "Exporting Good Governance: Temptations and Challenges in Canada's Aid Program" (with Jennifer Welsh, Laurier University Press, 2007)
Woods, N. "Making Self-Regulation Effective in Developing Countries" (with Dana Brown, Oxford University Press, 2007)
Woods, N. (Editor) Explaining International Relations since 1945, Oxford University Press, 1996; ISBN 0-19-874196-0
Woods, N. (Co-Author) Inequality, Globalization, and World Politics, Oxford University Press, 1999; ISBN 0-19-829567-7
Mattli, W and Woods, N (Co-Author) The Politics of Global Regulation, Princeton University Press March 2009; ISBN 0-691-13961-X


== References ==


== External links ==
Blavatnik School of Government, University of Oxford
Global Economic Governance Program