Partha Chatterjee (born 5 November 1947) is an Indian political scientist and anthropologist. He was the director of the Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Calcutta from 1997 to 2007 and continues as an honorary professor of political science. He is also a professor of anthropology and South Asian studies at Columbia University and a member of the Subaltern Studies Collective.Chatterjee received the Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize in 2009


== Education ==
He completed a BA (1967) and an M.A (1970) in political science from Presidency College, Calcutta and Calcutta University respectively. He completed his Ph.D. (1972) in international relations from the University of Rochester. His father, Santosh Chatterjee, was a Professor of Political Science at Calcutta University.


== Career ==
He was the professor of political science and served as a director of the Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Calcutta and is currently a professor (honorary) of the CSSSC and professor of anthropology and South Asian studies at Columbia University in New York. He was a founder-member of the Subaltern Studies Collective.He is a joint-editor of Baromash, a biannual Bengali literary journal published from Calcutta. In addition to numerous books in English, he has published collections of essays in Bengali.


== Publications ==
Books
1986. Nationalist Thought and the Colonial World.  London: Zed Books.
1993. The Nation and its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial Histories. Princeton University Press.
1995. Texts of Power.  Minneapolis University of Minnesota Press.
1997. A Possible India.  New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
1997. The Present History of West Bengal.  New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
2003. A Princely Impostor? The Strange and Universal History of the Kumar of Bhawal. Princeton University Press.
2004. The Politics of the Governed: Popular Politics in Most of the World, Columbia University Press.
2010. Empire and Nation: Selected Essays 1985-2005, Columbia University Press.
2011. Lineages of Political Society: Studies in Postcolonial Democracy, Columbia University Press
2012. The Black Hole of Empire: History of a Global Practice of Power, Princeton University Press.Other Publications

1988. The Nationalist Resolution of the Women's Question. Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Calcutta.


== See also ==
Vivek Chibber


== References ==


== External links ==
Biography of Partha Chatterjee on Columbia University's faculty page
Member Profile, Committee on Global Thought at Columbia University
The Two Hats of Partha Chatterjee: An Interview
Partha Chatterjee: Colonialism, History and Civil Society
[1] Towards a Postcolonial Modernity - Asiasource Interview with Partha Chatterjee