Paul Elliot Starr (born May 12, 1949) is a professor of sociology and public affairs at Princeton University. He is also the co-editor (with Robert Kuttner) and co-founder (with Kuttner and Robert Reich) of The American Prospect, a notable liberal magazine created in 1990. In 1994, he founded the Electronic Policy Network, or Moving Ideas, an online public policy resource. In 1993, Starr was the senior advisor for President Bill Clinton's proposed health care reform plan. He is also the president of the Sandra Starr Foundation.
At Princeton University, Starr holds the Stuart Chair in Communications and Public Affairs at the Woodrow Wilson School.


== Education and personal life ==
Starr earned a B.A. from Columbia University in 1970 and a Ph.D. in Sociology from Harvard University in 1978.Starr's first wife, Sandra Starr, died in 1998. Currently, Starr lives in Princeton, New Jersey and is married to Ann Baynes Coiro. He has four children and three stepchildren.


== Works ==
Starr's works have focused on politics, public policy, and social theory. However, within sociology, his work has focused on political sociology; institutional analysis; and how the sociology of knowledge, technology, and information affects democracy, equality, and freedom. Furthermore, he has written books relating to how policies affect health care, with works such as The Social Transformation of American Medicine, The Logic of Health Care Reform, and Remedy and Reaction: The Peculiar American Struggle over Health-Care Reform. In addition to his work on sociology, he has written works on the media, public, and liberalism, with works such as The Creation of the Media: Political Origins of Modern Communications and Freedom's Power.


== Books ==
Entrenchment: Wealth, Power, and the Constitution of Democratic Societies (Yale University Press, 2019).
Remedy and Reaction: The Peculiar American Struggle over Health Care Reform (Yale University Press, 2011).
Freedom's Power: The True Force of Liberalism (Basic Books, 2007).
The Creation of the Media: Political Origins of Modern Communications (Basic Books, 2004). Goldsmith Book Prize.
The Logic of Health Care Reform, rev. and enlarged edition (Penguin, 1994); orig. ed. (Grand Rounds Press, 1992).
The Politics of Numbers: The Population of the United States in the 1980s (Russell Sage, 1987), edited with William Alonso.
The Social Transformation of American Medicine (Basic Books, 1982 [actually published in January 1983]; 2nd ed. with new epilogue pub. 2017).
The Discarded Army: Veterans After Vietnam (Charterhouse, 1974), assisted by James Henry and Raymond Bonner. Introduction by Ralph Nader.
The University Crisis Reader, 2 vols., edited with Immanuel Wallerstein (Random House, 1971).
Up Against the Ivy Wall, with Jerry Avorn and others (Atheneum, 1968).


== Awards and recognition ==
Bancroft Prize for The Social Transformation of American Medicine
C. Wright Mills Award for The Social Transformation of American Medicine
Goldsmith Book Prize for The Creation of the Media - 2005
James Hamilton Award of American College of Health Care Executives for The Social Transformation of American Medicine - 1984
Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction for The Social Transformation of American Medicine - 1984


== References ==


== External links ==
Princeton faculty page
Biography from American Prospect
Video of debate/discussion about American freedom with Starr and Anne-Marie Slaughter on Bloggingheads.tv
Irfan Khawaja, Review of Paul Starr, Freedom's Power (and two other books), Reason Papers 31 (Fall 2009)
Appearances on C-SPAN