Paul Bracken (born March 12, 1948) is a professor of political science and business at Yale University.
Bracken is a respected thought leader in global competition and the strategic application of technology in business and defense.  His research and teaching focus on solutions for senior management as it deals with a changing strategic environment and conditions of intense uncertainty. He is a leading teacher in executive education and has run programs for companies in finance, technology, retail, and health care.  He is also a frequent teacher at One Day University on topics such as Problem Framing in Business, the Future of the Corporation, Big Business and Democracy, and the Second Nuclear Age.
He is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations, and has served on the Chief of Naval Operations Executive Panel, the Board of Advisors of the Naval Postgraduate School and the U.S. Naval War College; and an advisory group for Los Alamos National Laboratory. He has been a visiting scholar at the CIA and Beijing University; and has consulted with many other branches of the US Government.  He is a consultant to the Office of Net Assessment, and Senior Fellow and member of the Board of Advisors at the Foreign Policy Research Institute.
Bracken is included in Princeton Review’s book on The Best 300 Professors in the United States.   He also consults with several private equity firms, sovereign wealth firms, insurance companies, banks, and technology companies, and to the RAND Corporation.
He is the author of six books on global business, warning and risk, national security and world order and has written for The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, Financial Times, Newsweek, and Foreign Affairs. 
Prior to joining Yale, he was on the senior staff of the Hudson Institute for 10 years, where he worked closely with its founder, Herman Kahn, on futurology projects in business and defense.  He directed the management consulting arm of the institute. At Yale he is a Fellow of Silliman College, a member of the Elizabethan Club, and the Yale MacMillan Center. He lives in Ridgefield, Connecticut with his wife, Nanette, an attorney. He enjoys golf and ham radio (K3SOC). 
Professor Bracken grew up in Philadelphia. He received his Bachelor of Science (Engineering) degree from Columbia University and his PhD in Operations Research from Yale University.


== Activities at Yale ==
Bracken teaches a number of courses at Yale which draw students from virtually all schools and departments of the university:

Problem Framing (Corporate Futurology, Environmental Scanning, Scenarios, Alternative Futures, Red Teaming)
The Global Corporation
Technology & Global Corporate Strategy
Strategy, Technology, & War
Technology & Innovation (with Martin Shubik)He has led International Study Trips with Yale students:

The United Arab Emirates & Bahrain (twice): Tourism, Politics, and Economics
India: Business, Government & the Indian Economy
Paris, Brussels, & Frankfurt: Europe and the WorldBracken also leads Yale Alumni trips to many parts of the world:

The Trans-Siberian Railway and Russia
The Baltic States (Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia) & Sweden
Western Europe and the Atlantic
Qatar, Oman, Dubai
Algeria and North Africa
Costa Rica and the Panama Canal
Cuba
The Mekong River and Southeast AsiaWar Games
Professor Bracken frequently uses role playing war games for organizations facing complex new situations.  He has designed and run games for the US Government on strategic nuclear war, with personal play by the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Proud Prophet); and for the White House on a terrorist strike on Wall Street, played in the World Trade Center.
He has recently run business war games for corporations on:

Expansion of the Panama Canal and its implications for infrastructure, private equity, transportation, and energy sectors
Managing Risks of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act for African Investment
European Energy Strategies for National Oil & Gas Companies
The Global Shipbuilding Industry
The Future of the European Financial Services Industry,
US Financial Services Strategies in the New Regulatory Environment
Technology Integration Games for Wall Street


== Selected works ==
Books

The Hunt for Mobile Missiles: AI, Nuclear Weapons, and the New Arms Race, Foreign Policy Research Institute, 2020
The Second Nuclear Age: Strategy, Danger, and the New Power Politics, Times Books, 2012
Better Business Thinking: A Practical Guide to Environmental Scanning, Scenarios, Alternative Futures, and Red Teaming in Business,  forthcoming
Managing Strategic Surprise: Lessons from Risk Assessment and Risk Management (with Ian Bremmer and David Gordon, eds.), Cambridge University Press, 2008
Fire in the East: The Rise of Asian Military Power and the Second Nuclear Age, HarperCollins, 1999
Reforging European Security (with Kurt Gottfried, Hans Bethe, et al), Cambridge University Press, 1990The Command and Control of Nuclear Forces, Yale University Press, 1983 – reviewed on page 1 of the New York Times Book Review by McGeorge Bundy, and page 1 of the Washington Post Book Review by Desmond BallSelected Articles and Chapters

“The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review: Signaling Restraint with Stipulations,” Foreign Policy Research Institute e-note, February 2018
“New Technology and World Order,” in Strategic Latency: Managing the National and International Security Consequences of Disruptive Technologies (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 2018)
“Stress Testing the World Nuclear System,” The Strategist (Canberra) January 2018“The Cyber Threat to Nuclear Stability,” Orbis  Summer 2016
"Managing to Fail, Why Strategy is Disjointed," The American Interest, Fall, 2007
"Financial Warfare" Orbis, Fall 2007
"Net Assessment: A Practical Guide" Parameters, Spring 2006
"Business War Gaming" Scenario & Strategy Planning, 2001


== References ==


== External links ==