Reeta Chowdhari Tremblay (born 1950) is a Canadian political scientist and former senior academic administrator. She is an internationally recognized expert on Kashmir and India-Pakistan.


== Biography ==
Tremblay is Professor of Comparative Politics and Global South in the Department of Political Science at the University of Victoria, British Columbia. She was born in Jammu and Kashmir, India, obtained an MPhil from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, and MA and PhD from the University of Chicago (1990). She is among the 50 prominent Indo-Canadians whose biographies appear in the Indian diaspora publication the A-List.


== Work ==
Her writings on Kashmir and India–Pakistan relations, a subject on which she is considered to be a leading North American expert, are widely reviewed and cited. Her research deals with identity-based politics, secessionist movements, the politics of subaltern resistance and accommodation in post-colonial societies, democracy and governance, primarily in the South Asian context. She has authored or co-authored six books and over 60 articles and reviews.
Tremblay has held senior academic administrative positions in Canada: Vice-President Academic and Provost at the University of Victoria,  Vice-President (Academic) and Vice-Chancellor (Pro Tem) at Memorial University of Newfoundland; earlier, she was Dean of the Faculty of Arts at Memorial University, and Chair of the Department of Political Science at Concordia University, Montreal which she is credited with having re-built and raised to the ranks of the stronger such departments in Canada.  While at Memorial University, she helped found what has become the highly successful SPARKS Literary Festival with noted Canadian poet Mary Dalton in 2009.She is past president of the Canadian Political Science Association (CPSA), of the Canadian Asian Studies Association (CASA), and the former Canadian Council Area Studies Learned Societies (CCASLS). She has also been on editorial boards of PS:Political Science & Politics American Political Science Association, Pacific Affairs, Canadian Journal of Law and Society and Politics and Governance.
Tremblay is also associated with the Centre d’études et de recherche sur l'Inde, l'Asie du Sud et sa diaspora (CERIAS) at the Université du Québec à Montréal, a CAPI Associate at the Centre for Asia-Pacific Initiatives, a founding member of the Global South Asia Forum at the University of Victoria and a non-resident fellow at the Society for Policy Studies (SPS), New Delhi. In 2015, she was a visiting fellow at the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study at Wassenaar. In 2016 and 2017 summer terms, she was a visiting scholar at SOAS (School of Oriental and African Studies), University of London.


== Selected bibliography ==
Modi's Foreign Policy,(with Ashok Kapur), Sage Publications, (2017). (Review)
"Contested Governance, Competing Nationalisms, and Disenchanted Publics: Kashmir beyond Intractability?" in Chitralekhas Zutshi (ed) Kashmir: History, Politics, and Representation, Cambridge University Press, 2017. (Review)
"Beyond Parochialism and Domestic Preoccupation: the current state of comparative politics in Canada", Canadian Journal of Political Science, Vol. 45, Issue 4, 2012; pp. 741–756.
"Kashmir's Secessionist Movement Resurfaces: Ethnic Identity, Community Competition, and the State", Asian Survey, Vol. 49, No. 6, 2009; pp. 924–950.
"Institutional Causes of Indo-Pakistani Rivalry" with Julian Schofield, in T.V. Paul (ed), The Indian Pakistan Conflict: An Enduring Rivalry, Cambridge University Press, 2005, pp. 225–250.
"Inclusive Administration: Feminist Critiques of Bureaucracy" in Keith Henderson and O.P. Dwivedi (ed), Bureaucracy and Alternatives in World Perspectives, MacMillan Press, 1999, pp. 69–94.
"Nation, Identity and the Intervening Role of the State: A Study of the Secessionist Movement in Kashmir", Pacific Affairs, Vol. 69, No.4, winter 1996-97,1997, pp. 471–498.
"Representation of Self and Society in Bombay Cinema", Contemporary South Asia, Vol 5 No.3 October 1996, pp. 295–308.
"Kashmir: The Valley's Political Dynamics", Contemporary South Asia, Vol. 4, No. 1 (Kashmir Special Issue), March, 1995, pp. 79–101.


== References ==


== External links ==
Bio on UVIC website
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QCqEHHuH-3w
http://www.cpac.ca/en/programs/podium/episodes/15570963