Richard David Portes CBE is professor of Economics at London Business School.  He was President of the Centre for Economic Policy Research, which he founded. He also serves as Directeur d'Etudes at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales in Paris.He was a Rhodes Scholar and a Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford. He also taught at Princeton University, Harvard University (as a Guggenheim Fellow), was the founder of the Economics Department at Birkbeck College (University of London) in 1972. In 1999–2000, he was the Distinguished Global Visiting Professor at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, and in 2003–04 he was Joel Stern Visiting Professor of International Finance at Columbia Business School.
Professor Portes is a Fellow of the Econometric Society and a Fellow of the British Academy.  He was the longest serving Secretary-General of the Royal Economic Society (1992–2008) since John Maynard Keynes. He is Co-Chairman of the Board of Economic Policy. He is a member of the Group of Economic Policy Advisers to the President of the European Commission. He is the chair of the Steering Committee of the Euro50 Group, of the Bellagio Group on the International Economy, and of the Advisory Scientific Committee to the European Systemic Risk Board.


== Writings ==
Portes's current research interests include international finance, international macroeconomics, macroprudential regulation, European integration, and European bond markets. He has written extensively on sovereign debt, European monetary and financial issues, international capital flows, centrally planned economies and transition, macroeconomic disequilibrium, and European integration. His study (with Richard Baldwin and Joseph Francois) on the Eastern Enlargement of the European Union was widely cited in the public policy debate leading up to the 2004 Enlargement. His work on collective action clauses in sovereign bond contracts, on the international role of the euro, on international financial stability and on European bond markets has been directed towards policy as well as academic publications.


== Awards ==
Richard Portes was created CBE in the Queen’s 2003 New Year Honours.Portes holds three honorary doctorates, including one from Paris Dauphine University


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Web page of Richard Portes at London Business School
Web page of Richard Portes on voxeu.org
Works by or about Richard Portes in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
CEPR website Richard Portes publications indexed by Google Scholar