Richard Eugene Sylla (born) is the chairman of the board of trustees of the Museum of American Finance.Before his retirement in 2015, he served as the Henry Kaufman Professor of the History of Financial Institutions and Markets and a professor of economics, entrepreneurship, and innovation at New York University Stern School of Business, where he taught courses in financial history, economic and business history of the United States, and comparative enterprise systems.  Professor Sylla also taught for the TRIUM Global Executive MBA Program alliance of NYU Stern, the London School of Economics and HEC School of Management, and served as academic director of executive programs at NYU Stern.


== Biography ==
Prior to joining Stern, Sylla taught at North Carolina State University and the University of Pennsylvania.  His primary areas of research include historical studies of money, banking, and finance, and he is the past editor of Journal of Economic History and serves on the editorial board of many journals, including Financial History Review, Enterprise and Society, and Economic and Financial History Abstracts.  He once served as president of the Economic History Association and the Business History Conference. Sylla received several awards and grants, including National Science Foundation grants, an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation grant, and the Citibank Award for Excellence in Teaching at the Stern School. He resides in Hopkinton, New Hampshire and New York City with his wife Edith.Sylla's brother, James, who was president of Chevron U.S.A. Inc., died in the crash of Pacific Southwest Airlines Flight 1771 in 1987.


== Books ==
Sylla has (co)authored five books and co-edited several others.
Sylla, R. (2016). Alexander Hamilton: The Illustrated Biography. Sterling.
Robert E. Wright. & R. Sylla (2015). Genealogy of American Finance. Columbia University Press.
Homer, S. & R. Sylla (2005). A History of Interest Rates, Fourth Edition. Wiley Finance.
Ratner, S., J. Soltow, and R. Sylla (1993). The Evolution of the American Economy: Growth, Welfare, and Decision Making. MacMillan Publishing Company.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Sylla, R. The American Capital Market, Eighteen Forty-Six to Nineteen Fourteen: A Study of the Effects of Public Policy on Economic Development (Dissertations in American Economic History Ser.). Arno Press.


== Articles, chapters, and other publications ==
Sylla has published scores of articles and book chapters, including: and has also been quoted in USA Today.
Rousseau, P. & R. Sylla (Aug 2001). Financial Systems, Economic Growth, and Globalization. 65. Nashville: Vanderbilt University.
Sylla R. & R. Wright (1994). Networks and History's Generalizations: Comparing the Financial Systems of Germany, Japan, Great Britain, and the United States of America. 2. Business and Economic History On-Line.
Sylla, R. (Nov 1995). The Rise of Securities Markets: What Can Government Do?. The World Bank.


== Education ==
Professor Sylla received his BA from Harvard before studying at the Indian Statistical Institute at Calcutta.  He also received a MA and PhD from Harvard.


== References ==


== External links ==
NYU Stern Biography
Department of Economics Biography
USA Today Articles