Robert J. Beck (born 1961) is an educator and scholar of international law and international relations.


== Education ==
Born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin and educated at Marquette University High School, Beck received an Honors B.A. Magna Cum Laude (Political Science, History, Latin), Phi Beta Kappa, from Marquette University in 1983.  He received MA (1985) and PhD (1989, with distinction) degrees in International Politics from Georgetown University's Department of Government.  Beck also participated in law institutes at New York University's School of Law, the University of Virginia's School of Law, and Dartmouth College.


== Academic career ==
An Associate Professor of Political Science at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, Beck also teaches in the Global Studies degree program.   In addition, he currently serves as UWM's Associate Vice Chancellor and Chief Information Officer.
From 2003-2013, he was Chief Information Officer of UWM's College of Letters and Science. From 2000 until July 2011 he served as Director of Academic Technology at UWM's Center for International Education.  From 1998-2000, he served as Director of Tufts University's Center for Teaching Excellence.  Beck earlier taught at the University of Virginia (Government & Foreign Affairs, 1989–90, 91-98) and the University of Minnesota (Political Science, 1990–91).Beck maintains two noteworthy websites:  Learning Objects; and Foreign Affairs Online. Beck has been a regular scholarly collaborator with his long-time friend, Anthony Clark Arend.  Since 2003, he has also been a regularly featured guest on the television series, "International Focus", produced by the Institute of World Affairs at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.


== Bibliography ==
Law and Disciplinarity:  Thinking beyond Borders  (editor, 2013)
International Law volume of International Studies Encyclopedia (co-editor, with Henry F. Carey, 2010)
International Law and the Rise of Nations (co-editor, with Thomas Ambrosio, 2001)
International Rules:  Approaches from International Law and International Relations (co-editor, with Anthony Clark Arend and Robert Vander Lugt, 1996)
International Law and the Use of Force (co-author, with Anthony Clark Arend, second edition forthcoming, 1993 first edition)
The Grenada Invasion:  Politics, Law, and Foreign Policy Decisionmaking (author, 1993)


== References ==


== External links ==
University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee's Center for International Education
Foreign Affairs Online
Learning Objects