Theodore Millon () (August 18, 1928 – January 29, 2014) was an American psychologist known for his work on personality disorders.


== Biography ==
Millon was born in 1928, the only child of immigrant Jewish parents from Lithuania and Poland. His 19th-century ancestors came from the town of Valozhyn, then a part of the Russian Empire.: 309  Receiving degrees from both American and European universities, he was a member of the board of trustees of Allentown State Hospital, a large Pennsylvania psychiatric hospital for 15 years. Shortly thereafter he became the founding editor of the Journal of Personality Disorders and the inaugural president of the International Society for the Study of Personality Disorders. He was Professor Emeritus at Harvard Medical School and the University of Miami.In 2008, Millon was awarded the Gold Medal Award For Life Achievement in the Application of Psychology by the American Psychological Association.The American Psychological Foundation presents an award named after Millon, known as the "Theodore Millon Award in Personality Psychology," to honor outstanding psychologists engaged in "advancing the science of personality psychology including the areas of personology, personality theory, personality disorders, and personality measurement."


== Theoretical work ==
Millon has written numerous popular works on personality, developed diagnostic questionnaire tools such as the Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory, and contributed to the development of earlier versions of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.
Among other diagnoses, Millon advocated for an expanded version of passive aggressive personality disorder, which he termed 'negativistic' personality disorder and argued could be diagnosed by criteria such as "expresses envy and resentment toward those apparently more fortunate" and "claims to be luckless, ill-starred, and jinxed in life; personal content is more a matter of whining and grumbling than of feeling forlorn and despairing" (APA, 1991, R17). Passive-Aggressive Personality Disorder was expanded somewhat as an official diagnosis in the DSM-III-R but then relegated to the appendix of DSM-IV, tentatively renamed 'Passive-Aggressive (Negativistic) Personality Disorder'.


=== Millon's personality disorder subtypes ===
Millon devised a set of subtypes for each of the DSM personality disorders:
Sadistic (psychopathic) personality disorder subtypes
Self-defeating (masochistic) personality disorder subtypes
Schizotypal personality disorder subtypes
Schizoid personality disorder subtypes
Paranoid personality disorder subtypes
Antisocial (sociopathic) personality disorder subtypes
Borderline personality disorder subtypes
Histrionic personality disorder subtypes
Narcissistic personality disorder subtypes
Dependent personality disorder subtypes
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder subtypes
Avoidant personality disorder subtypes
Passive-aggressive (negativistic) personality disorder subtypes
Depressive personality disorder subtypes
Exuberant/Hypomanic (turbulent) personality disorder subtypes
Decompensated Personality Disorder


== Books ==
1969: Modern Psychopathology: A Biosocial Approach to Maladaptive Learning and Functioning, Saunders
1981: Disorders of Personality: DSM-III: Axis II. John Wiley & Sons ISBN 0-471-06403-3
1996: (with Roger D. Davis) Disorders of Personality: DSM IV and Beyond  2nd edition, John Wiley & Sons ISBN 0-471-01186-X
1974: (with Renée Millon) Abnormal behavior and personality: a biosocial learning approach, Saunders
2004: Personality Disorders in Modern Life, John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 0-471-23734-5
2004: Masters of the Mind: exploring the story of mental illness. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9780471469858
2007: (with Seth Grossman) Moderating Severe Personality Disorders: A Personalized Psychotherapy Approach, John Wiley & Sons.
2007: (with Seth Grossman) Resolving Difficult Clinical Syndromes: A Personalized Psychotherapy Approach, John Wiley & Sons.
2007: (with Seth Grossman) Overcoming Resistant Personality Disorders: A Personalized Psychotherapy Approach, John Wiley & Sons.
2008: (editor with Paul H. Blaney) Oxford Textbook of Psychopathology, 2nd Ed., Oxford University Press.
2008: (editor with Robert Krueger and Erik Simonsen) Contemporary Directions in Psychopathology: Toward the DSM-V and ICD-11, Guilford Press
2008: The Millon inventories: a practitioner's guide to personalized clinical assessment, Guilford Press ISBN 978-1-59385-674-8
2011: Disorders of Personality: Introducing a DSM/ICD Spectrum from Normal to Abnormal, 3rd edition John Wiley & Sons ISBN 0470040939


== See also ==
Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory
Pyotr Gannushkin (1875-1933) — a Russian psychiatrist who created a classification of personality disorders, then known as "psychopathies", that intersect in many respects with those of Theodore Millon.


== References ==


== Sources ==
Theodore Millon, a Student of Personality, Dies at 85, The New York Times, January 31, 2014.


== External links ==
The Millon Personality Group