Tom A.  B. Snijders (born September 26, 1949) is professor of Statistics in the Social Sciences at Nuffield College, Oxford, one of the constituent colleges of the University of Oxford (since October 1, 2006). He is also professor of Methodology at the University of Groningen, a position he has held for more than twenty years.


== Career ==
Tom Snijders was born in Tilburg, a son of Jan Snijders, professor of Psychology at Groningen University from 1949 to 1980, and Nan Snijders-Oomen, an internationally well-known child psychologist (author of the SON nonverbal intelligence test, 1943, 1978, 1991).
Snijders grew up in the province of Groningen, in the northern part of the Netherlands. He was awarded a cum laude Ph.D. in Mathematics, specializing in mathematical statistics, for his thesis Asymptotic optimality theory for testing problems with restricted alternatives. Since 1985 he worked as a professor of various forms of mathematics serving social science. He was part-time professor of Mathematical Sociology at Utrecht University from 1989-1992 and is an honorary senior fellow of the University of Melbourne in Australia. Stockholm University made him an honorary doctor in 2005, as did Paris Dauphine University in 2011. In 2007 Snijders became correspondent of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2008 Snijders was awarded the Order of Knight of the Netherlands Lion.


== Social networks ==
Snijders is a prominent researcher in the field of statistic methods in behavioural and social sciences. In 1998, together with others, he created Stocnet, an open software system for the advanced statistical analysis of social networks. Snijders is working especially in social network analysis: statistical methods for analysing social networks and in network evolution, in social science, mathematical sociology and mathematical response theory, and also in multilevel models analysis, about which he wrote a textbook, titled Multilevel Analysis. An Introduction to Basic and Advanced Multilevel Modeling (1999). Apart from this he developed new statistical methods for social science applications, often in combination with the development of computer software to implement these methods. Together with professor Patrick Doreian of the University of Pittsburgh Tom Snijders edits the international scientific journal Social networks. An international journal of structural analysis.


== Sources and links ==
Nuffield College, Sociology Group
University of Groningen, Faculty of Behavioural and Social Sciences
Social Network Analysis page of Tom Snijders
Social networks. An international journal of structural analysis
Website of Tom Snijders with a full list of functions, publications and interests
Knipscheer, Corn.J.: XIX generaties Oome- Oomen- Oomens- Oomes. Breda, 1984.
Snijders, Jan: Snijders-Oomen. Een levens- en familieverhaal. Den Haag, 1997.


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Tom Snijders at the Mathematics Genealogy Project