Vusal Afras ogly Gasimli (Azerbaijani: Vüsal Əfras oğlu Qasımlı) is an Azerbaijani economist serving as the Executive director of the Center for Economic Reforms Analysis and Communication of the Republic of Azerbaijan (since 2016), was the Head of Economic Analysis and Global Affairs Department of the Center for Strategic Studies under the President of Azerbaijan (2011-2016), and the President of "ANS-PRESS" Publishing House (2005-2007). Since 2021 he was appointed Focal Point of UNESCAP. He is the author of more than 10 books and 500 scientific works on economics in Azerbaijani, Russian, English, and Korean.


== Biography ==
Vusal Gasimli was born in Imishli on 7 April 1975. He is married, with three children.


=== Education ===
Gasimli received his primary and secondary education in high school #34 of Imishli. He entered the Azerbaijan State University of Economics in 1993 with the highest score. After graduation, Gasimli continued his education at Georgian Institute of Public Affairs in Tbilisi based on the study program of Louisiana State University and received a master's degree in Journalism and Media Management in 2004.
In 2021 Vusal Gasimli was awarded a certificate of completion for the "Leading Economic Growth" Program, [February-May/2021], John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, Executive Education.  In 2013 Vusal Gasimli was given the title of associate professor and in 2021 he was given the title of professor.
Afterwards in 2009 Gasimli was awarded the degree of PhD on Economics, and in 2017 he was awarded the title of Doctor of Science on Economics. Being a results-driven researcher with a strong background in macroeconomics, his studies are focused on economic development, competitiveness, modernization, and geoeconomics.
He is fluent in English, Turkish and Russian. Gasimli has an elementary knowledge of Spanish.


== Scientific activity ==
In 2010-2014, Gasimli was engaged in pedagogical activities at the UNEC Special Talent Group and MBA program. He delivered public lectures at the Washington University in St. Louis, University of California, The American University in Cairo, University of Warsaw, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Hanyang University, Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, and Rio de Janeiro State University. In 2013, he was also employed by KIEP as a visiting professor.
In 2012, Gasimli received the award of Astana Economic Forum for his outstanding research achievements.
His book, Geoeconomics, a work highly estimated by the world scientific society, was published in 2015. Commenting on the book, the professor of King's College London, Friedbert Pflüger noted that "Gasimli created a unique concept of geoeconomics".


== Career ==
From 2005 to 2007 Gasimli was the President of "ANS-PRESS" Publishing House. In 2007-2011, he consulted on the projects of The European Union, World Bank, JICA, and other intergovernmental organizations. In 2011, he was appointed the Head of Economic Analysis and Global Affairs Department of the Center for Strategic Studies under the President of Azerbaijan. He participated in the sessions of the UNIDO. Gasimli joined the T20 network (Think Tanks from G20 countries) as a representative of Azerbaijan in 2015. 
In 2016, he became an economic development consultant for the Asian Development Bank. According to the final decision of the meeting held by the Supervisory Board of the Center for Economic Reforms Analysis and Communication, on May 2, 2016, Vusal Gasimli was appointed the Executive director of the Center.He is also a member of the government commission established on the basis of the Order of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan dated July 13, 2016 No. 2199 "On additional measures to improve the business environment in the Republic of Azerbaijan and further improvement of the position of our country in international rankings". For his achievements in this field, in 2018, Ilham Aliyev awarded Gasimli the Taraggi Medal.


== References ==


== External links ==
Dr.Vusal Gasimli on LinkedIn
Vusal Gasimli on Facebook
Geo-economics by Vusal Gasimli
Modernization of Azerbaijan economy: The role of transnational companies by Vusal Gasimli
Resource-rich Countries: Modernization and Diversification: The case of Azerbaijan by Vusal Gasimli
The impact of some key factors on labour productivity in European countries by Vusal Gasimli